For the mosque in Sweden, see Khadija Mosque (Malmö).
Khadija Mosque (German: Khadija-Moschee), is a mosque located in Heinersdorf, Pankow, Berlin. It is the property of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community, and the first mosque in the former East Germany, opening on October 16, 2008. The mosque has a 39 feet (12 m) high minaret and can hold 500 worshippers. The mosque was financed by funds collected by Ahmadiyya women and the design was done by the architect Mubashra Ilyas.[1]
Another mosque was built in Berlin between 1924 and 1928 by the Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement.
Contents
1 History
2 Construction
3 See also
4 References
5 External links
History[edit]
The Ahmadiyya Muslim Jamaat had already tried to build their first mosque in Europe in Berlin in the 1920s[2] According to the wish of the second Khalifa the women of the community collected all the funds for the mosque from their own resources. However, due to the financial crisis in Germany the plan had to be given up.[3] Instead, the money was used for the construction of the Fazl Mosque in London. Under the 100-Mosques-Plan of the community in Germany, the project was revived and a new mosque was planned in Berlin. The Khadija mosque is the first mosque in the eastern part of Berlin.
Construction[edit]
The foundation stone for the mosque was laid down on 2. January 2007 by the 5th Khalifa of the community, Mirza Masroor Ahmad. The mosque is built on a piece of land which is 4790 m² large. It consists of two stories. There are two prayer rooms, for 250 women and 250 men each. The mosque was designed by the architect of the community, Mubashra Ilyas.[4] The construction was overseen by the architect company Pakdel.[5] The dome of the mosque is 4.5 meter in height and has a diameter of 9 meters. The minaret of the mosque is 13 meter high.[6] The costs for the construction of the mosque and a building for housing for the Imam and a "servant of the mosque" and offices were about €1.7 million.
See also[edit]
Germany portal
Islam portal
Islam in Germany
List of mosques in Europe