The Sixty Dome Mosque (Bengali: ষাট গম্বুজ মসজিদ Shaṭ Gombuj Moshjid; more commonly known as Shait Gambuj Mosque or Saith Gunbad Masjid), is a mosque in Bagerhat, Bangladesh. It is a part of the Mosque City of Bagerhat, a UNESCO World Heritage Site. It is the largest mosque in Bangladesh from the sultanate period (1204–1576). It was built during the Bengal Sultanate by Ulugh Khan Jahan, the governor of the Sundarbans. It has been described as "one of the most impressive Muslim monuments in the whole of South Asia."[1]
Contents
1 History
2 Location
3 Style
4 Sixty domes or sixty columns
5 Gallery
6 See also
7 Notes
8 External links
History[edit]
In the middle of the 15th century, a Muslim colony was founded in the mangrove forest of the Sundarbans, near the coast in the Bagerhat District by a saint-General, named Khan Jahan Ali. He preached in an affluent city during the reign of Sultan Nasiruddin Mahmud Shah, then known as 'Khalifatabad'.[2] Khan Jahan adorned this city with more than a dozen mosques, the ruins of which are focused around the most imposing and largest multi-domed mosques in Bangladesh, known as the Shait-Gumbad Masjid (160'×108').[2] The construction of the mosque was started in 1442[2] and it was completed in 1459. The mosque was used for prayers, and also as a madrasha and assembly hall.[3]
Location[edit]
It is located in Bagerhat district in southern Bangladesh which is in Khulna Division.[1] It is about 5 kilometres (3 mi) from the main town of Bagerhat.[4] Bagerhat is nearly 320 km (200 mi) from Dhaka which is the capital of Bangladesh.[3]
Style[edit]
The 'Sixty Dome' Mosque has walls of unusually thick, tapered brick in the Tughlaq style and a hut-shaped roofline that anticipates later styles. The mosque has an oblong plan of 148'6" x 101'4" externally and 123'3" x 76'2" internally.[5] There are 77 low domes arranged in seven rows of eleven, and one dome on each corner, bringing the total to 81 domes. There are four towers. Two of four towers were used to call the azaan. The interior is divided into many aisles and bays by slender columns, which culminate in numerous arches that support the roof.
The mosque has 77 squat domes with 7 four-sided pitched Bengali domes in the middle row. The vast prayer hall, although provided with 11 arched doorways on east and 7 each on north and south for ventilation and light, presents a dark and somber appearance inside. It is divided into 7 longitudinal aisles and 11 deep bays by a forest of 60 slender stone columns, from which springs rows of endless arches, supporting the domes. 1.8 m (6 ft) thick, slightly tapering walls and hollow and round, almost detached corner towers, resembling the bastions of fortress, each capped by small rounded cupolas, recall the Tughlaq architecture of Delhi. The western wall has eleven mihrabs on the interior where ten are blind and the central one is projected on the exterior.[5] The mosque represents wonderful archeological beauty which was the signature in the 15th century.
Sixty domes or sixty columns[edit]
The mosque is locally known as the 'Shat Gombuj Masjid', which in Bengali means Sixty Domed Mosque. However, there are 77 domes over the main hall and exactly 60 stone pillars.[4] It is possible that the mosque was originally referred to as the Sixty Pillared Mosque where Amud (شصت عمؤد ) meaning column in Arabic/Persian, later got corrupted to Gombuj (গম্বুজ) in Bengali, which means domes.
Gallery[edit]
Sixty Dome Mosque Bangladesh
Sixty dome mosque in the evening
Side View
Southeastern View
Panoramic view of Sixty Dome Mosque
Inside of Mosque
Ceiling of the Mosque
Inside of the Mosque
Arches of the Mosque
Arches of the Mosque
Arches of the Mosque
Exterior of the Mosque
Exterior of the Mosque
Inside Pillars
Bagerhat Museum Bangladesh
See also[edit]
Mosque City of Bagerhat
Lalbagh Fort
Shahbaz Khan Mosque
List of archaeological sites in Bangladesh
Notes[edit]
^
a b Bari, MA (2012). "Shatgumbad Mosque". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh.
^
a b c "Shat Gombuj Mosque – Bangladesh". Banglaview24.com. 2012-04-24. Retrieved 2013-08-28.
^
a b "The Shat Gambuj Masjid (The Sixty Domes Mosque)". Rafiul alam. Retrieved 2012-04-14.
^
a b "Shat Gambuj Mosque: world Heritage site as a historical beautiful mosque". Travel-bangladesh.net. Retrieved 2013-08-28.
^
a b Reza, Mohammad Habib; Hossain, Md Shajjad (2017). Documentation of Islamic Heritage of Bangladesh. Dhaka: Brac University.
External links[edit]
Saith Gunbad Masjid on Archnet
Website of Shat Gombuj Mosque
World Heritage Site
hide
vte
Mosques in Bangladesh
Barisal Division
Bibi Chini Mosque Guthia Mosque Kamalapur Mosque Miah Bari Mosque Momin Mosque Nasrat Gazi Mosque Qasba Mosque
Chittagong Division
Anderkilla Shahi Jame Mosque Arifil Mosque Asgar Ali Chowdhury Jame Mosque Bajra Shahi Mosque Chandgaon Mosque Faqir Mosque Jamiatul Falah Mosque Kapasgola Jamtola Shahi Jame Mosque Masjid-e-Siraj ud-Daulah Ramadan Miah Mosque Taltoli Jama Mosque Wali Khan Mosque
Dhaka Division
201 Dome Mosque Asrafia Jame Mosque Allakuri Mosque Atia Mosque Azimpur Mosque Baba Adam's Mosque Baitul Mukarram National Mosque Baitur Rauf Mosque Bibi Maryam Mosque Binat Bibi Mosque Chawk Mosque Goaldi Mosque Kakrail Mosque Kartalab Khan Mosque Katabon Mosque Khan Mohammad Mridha Mosque Musa Khan Mosque Pathrail Mosque Qassabtuly Mosque Sat Gambuj Mosque Shahbaz Khan Mosque Shaista Khan Mosque Star Mosque
Khulna Division
Masjidkur Mosque Nine Dome Mosque Singar Mosque Sixty Dome Mosque Tetulia Jami Mosque
Rajshahi Division
Bagha Mosque Choto Sona Mosque Darasbari Mosque Hinda-Qasbah Shahi Mosque Kusumba Mosque Shah Syed Niamatullah Mosque
Rangpur Division
Chini Mosque Laldighi Mosque Mithapukur Mosque Nayabad Mosque Sura Mosque
Sylhet Division
Ghayebi Dighi Mosque Goyghor Mosque Jiladpur Mosque Lawachara Jame Mosque Pagla Jame Mosque Shankarpasha Shahi Masjid
Eidgahs
Dhanmondi Shahi Eidgah Sylhet Shahi Eidgah
Category Islam in Bangladesh Mosques by country List of mosques in Bangladesh Mosques in Dhaka Mosques in Chittagong