Ayub Teaching Hospital (Urdu, Hindko: ایوب تدریسی سپتال, Pashto: د ایوب تدريسي روغتون, abbreviated as ATH), is a public sector, non-profit tertiary level academic health sciences centre located in Abbottabad, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan. Established in 1998, ATH has one of the largest trauma centres in the region serving the northeastern districts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, southern Gilgit-Baltistan and the northern districts of Azad Jammu & Kashmir. The hospital also serves as the chief teaching hospital of Ayub Medical College.[1][2][3]
Contents
1 Patient care
2 Teaching
3 Staffing
4 Wards
5 Administration
6 See also
7 References
8 External links
Patient care[edit]
ATH employs more than 500 in-house physicians including 60 residents (fellows) and 200 nurses. It is part of a consortium of hospitals which operates in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and is the primary teaching hospital for Ayub Medical College.
Teaching[edit]
ATH is the principal teaching affiliate of Ayub Medical College and the School of Nursing. Every member of the hospital medical and dental staff holds an academic appointment at the hospital and operates numerous residency training programs as well as resident and fellowship positions.
Staffing[edit]
There is around 3500 members of staff working at ATH. About 800 doctors are employed at the hospital, including senior doctors, trainees and house officers. Other staff members includes paramedics, nurses, and allied health professionals.
Wards[edit]
Surgical (A, B, C)
Medical (A, B, C)
Gynaecology-Obstetrics (A, B, C)
Labour room
Nursery
Accident & Emergency
Anesthesiology
Bait-ul-Mal
Cardiology
Dengue
Dermatology
Nephrology-Dialysis Department
Endocrinology
Gastroenterology
Neurosurgery
Oncology
Ophthalmology (A, B)
Orthopaedics (A, B)
Otorhinolaryngology (ENT) (A, B)
Paediatrics (A, B)
Physiotherapy
Psychiatry
Pulmonology (A, B)
Radiology
Urology
Rehabilitation center
Burn center
Institute of Nuclear Medicine, Oncology and Radiotherapy
neurology
Administration[edit]
ATH is an autonomous body of the provincial government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and is headed by a chief executive appointed by the government. The chain of command includes:
Medical Superintendent (1)
Deputy Medical Superintendents (6)
Resident Medical Officer (1)
Chief Nursing Superintendent (1)
Admin Officers (2)
Human Resource Manager (1)
Director Finance (1)
IT In-charge Department (1)
See also[edit]
Khyber Teaching Hospital
Saidu Teaching Hospital