The Burhani Hospital is located at Faiz Muhammad Fateh Ali Rd, New Chali, Karachi, Karachi City, Sindh 74200.
Contents
1 History
2 Facilities
3 Development
4 References
History[edit]
Burhani Hospital was initially established as a dispensary in 1913,[2] for the treatment of Influenza which had spread in Karachi as an epidemic.[3] The dispensary was later upgraded as Marvi Maternity Home. In 1978, Mohammed Burhanuddin converted the facilities to a full-fledged general hospital to be managed by Burhani Medical Board.
Facilities[edit]
Burhani Hospital is providing quality health care to the people in the best possible way at less than market rates.[4]
The hospital is equipped with modern and state-of-the-art facilities; and strives to render the best health services to the people. Some of the city’s best and renowned doctors practice at Burhani hospital, both as full-time and visiting specialists.
Based on quality health care provision and transparent management records, Burhani hospital was awarded Not for Profit Organization status in 2007, by the Pakistan Centre for Philanthropy, entitling the hospital from Government taxes exemptions including import duties, sales tax, and income tax. In 2006 a major expansion program was launched under the guidance of Mohammed Burhanuddin. Phase 1 of the hospital expansion project was completed and has been operating since March 2010.
The hospital has an 8 bed ultra-modern Intensive Care Unit, fully equipped with Ventilators, Central Monitoring Station and Individual Multi-parameter monitors, and other critical care equipment. The Hospital also has 6 advanced incubators based Neonatal Intensive Care Unit with all supportive elements including ventilators and ABG Analyzer.
Development[edit]
A huge complex is being constructed by the community which encompasses a multi-story building for the Bohra Community Centre. The Burhani Trust under a signed agreement has acquired four floors which will be directly linked through a bridge on the fourth floor that will join the complex with the present hospital. The outlay for the 4 floors has been designed by Mr. Maqsood Alvi who has the distinction of designing portions of the Aga Khan Hospital, Karachi.