The Liaquat University Hospital (LUH), commonly known as Civil Hospital, Hyderabad, is a 1450-bed tertiary care hospital in Sindh. It is one of the largest teaching hospitals affiliated with Liaquat University of Medical and Health Sciences, Jamshoro, the first medical university of public sector in Pakistan. The hospital serves Sindh and the neighboring province of Balochistan.[1][2][3][4]
Contents
1 Historical background
1.1 Renaming
2 Services
3 References
Historical background[edit]
The Liaquat University Hospital started functioning as Civil Hospital, Hyderabad, affiliated with the Bombay Faculty of Medicine, in 1881. The construction was completed by 1894. A medical school had also subsequently started in the premises of the hospital. The medical school was upgraded to the status of a degree college, Sindh Medical College, in 1945. The medical college was later shifted to Karachi and renamed as Dow Medical College in order to avoid deregulation by University of Bombay. In place of it, Liaquat Medical College (later known as Liaquat University of Medical and Health Sciences) was started in 1951 and later relocated to its new campus in Jamshoro. The hospital got affiliated with it as soon as the college was re-started in its premises. In 1963, another branch of the hospital in Jamshoro, Liaquat Medical College Hospital, designed by an Italian architect, was completed with 430 beds and started functioning as a teaching hospital.
Renaming[edit]
After the college was upgraded to the first public sector medical university, the hospital was renamed as Liaquat University Hospital, Hyderabad/Jamshoro.
Services[edit]
Initially established in 1881 to provide basic health facilities, the hospital has 1450 beds across various departments.
The clinical departments include:
Department of Internal Medicine
Paediatrics
Cardiology
Pulmonology
Dermatology
Family Medicine
Gastroenterology
Nuclear Medicine
Nephrology
Psychiatry
General Surgery
Trauma & Orthopaedic Surgery
Accident & Emergency
Plastic Surgery
Paediartric Surgery
NeuroSurgery
Obs & Gynae
Cardiothoracic surgery
Vascular Surgery
Urology and Radiology