The National Taiwan University Hospital (NTUH; Chinese: 國立台灣大學醫學院附設醫院; pinyin: Guólì Táiwān Dàxué Yīxuéyuàn Fùshè Yīyuàn) started operations under Japanese rule in Daitōtei (today's Dadaocheng) on 18 June 1895, and moved to its present location in 1898. The hospital was later annexed to the Medical School of Taihoku Imperial University in 1937. The present name was adopted in 1945.
On 19 October 1991, the completion of a large new building complex on the so-called East Site marked another milestone in the history of the NTUH. Today, the (new) East and (old) West Sites together have more than 4,000 employees, serving 2,000 inpatients and 8,000 outpatients daily. Advanced surgical, angiographical, and endoscopic procedures are routinely performed.
Contents
1 Heart Transplant Division
2 Transportation
3 See also
4 External links
Heart Transplant Division[edit]
The NTUH Heart Transplant is a staple part of National Taiwan University Hospital. It has performed numerous successful heart transplants since the founding of the hospital in 1895.
Despite its relatively young start, the Heart Transplant Division performed its first successful heart transplantation in 1986. Not only was it the first heart transplant in NTUH, but it was also, more importantly, the first heart transplant in all of Taiwan. Since then, it has expanded rapidly. In 1991, NTUH performed their first domino heart transplant. Later in 1995, NTUH was the first in all of Asia to implant biventricular-assist devices which were then bridged successfully into a heart transplant.
Transportation[edit]
The hospital is accessible within walking distance East from NTU Hospital Station of the Taipei Metro.
See also[edit]
Museum of Medical Humanities
Healthcare in Taiwan
List of hospitals in Taiwan
External links[edit]
National Taiwan University Hospital on Facebook
Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Taiwan University Hospital.
hide
vte
National Taiwan University
Facilities
Museum of Anthropology National Taiwan University Archives Museum of Medical Humanities Museum of Zoology National Taiwan University Hospital NTU Hospital Station National Taiwan University Sports Center Workshop of Advanced Academy of Agronomy and Forestry
Organizations
International Chinese Language Program Labor Union of National Taiwan University
Related
List of National Taiwan University people
Authority control
ISNI 1