The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center is a multidisciplinary academic medical center located in Columbus, Ohio, United States, on the main campus of The Ohio State University. It has been named in honor of Ohio State alumnus and The Limited founder Les Wexner since 2012.[2] For 26 consecutive years, U.S. News & World Report has recognized Ohio State Wexner Medical Center specialties in its "Best Hospitals" rankings. In 2020, it recognized 9 Ohio State Wexner Medical Center specialties, with ear, nose, and throat ranked #5, and rehabilitation ranked #12, this marked a decline from previous years.[3]
For 2018, USNWR named Ohio State Wexner Medical Center the best hospital in central Ohio.[4] In 2019, USNWR ranked Ohio State Wexner Medical Center the third best hospital in the state overall.[5]
Contents
1 Ohio State Health System
2 James Cancer Hospital and Solove Research Institute
3 The Ohio State University College of Medicine
4 Expansion
5 References
6 External links
Ohio State Health System[edit]
The Ohio State Health System includes University Hospital and East Hospital, Ohio State's two full-service teaching hospitals. Other hospitals include Ohio State Harding Hospital, an inpatient and outpatient psychiatric hospital; the Richard M. Ross Heart Hospital, dedicated to the study, treatment and prevention of cardiovascular diseases; Ohio State Brain and Spine Hospital, meeting the specialized needs of patients with acute brain and spine disorders; Dodd Rehabilitation Hospital, with a rehabilitation inpatient program; and the OSU Primary Care Network, an extensive network of community-based primary and subspecialty care facilities throughout central Ohio.
More than 64,000 inpatients receive medical care annually from The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center and the Health System manages more than 1.81 million outpatient visits each year.[6]
The Wexner Medical Center has more than 23,000 employees, including more than 1,500 physicians, more than 800 residents and nearly 5,000 nurses.[6]
James Cancer Hospital and Solove Research Institute[edit]
Main article: The James Cancer Hospital
The Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital and Richard J. Solove Research Institute is a dedicated cancer hospital and research center that is part of the university's Comprehensive Cancer Center, with a governance structure separate from, but coordinated with, Ohio State Wexner Medical Center. The OSUCCC – James is one of several cancer programs in the United States that features a National Cancer Institute (NCI)-designated comprehensive cancer center aligned with a nationally ranked academic medical center and a freestanding cancer hospital.
The Ohio State University College of Medicine[edit]
Main article: The Ohio State University College of Medicine
The Ohio State University College of Medicine is the medical school at The Ohio State University. The college is recognized in both education and research, as reflected by 2019 rankings in the Top 40 U.S. News & World Report. In the 2019 “Best Graduate Schools” rankings, The Ohio State University College of Medicine ranked only 32nd among all research medical schools in the nation. Among public universities, Ohio State is ranked number 12.[7]
Expansion[edit]
In 2017, Ohio State announced plans for the development of a new hospital and several large ambulatory centers. The new medical tower will include more than 800 beds, 60 neonatal intensive care unit bassinets, and state-of-the-art inpatient service areas. University leaders hope the new hospital tower will be completed by 2025.[8]