Qasr El Eyni Hospital (Arabic: مستشفى قصر العيني) is a research and teaching hospital in Cairo, Egypt. This hospital is affiliated with the Qasr El Eyni Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University and was founded on March 11, 1827.[1][2]
Contents
1 Timeline
2 Specialized units
3 References
4 Gallery of Photos
5 External links
Timeline[edit]
In 1827, a medical school was established and attached to a military hospital in Abu Zaabal. The French doctor Antoine Clot Bey (Antoine Clot) became the first director of the medical school and hospital.[2]
In 1837, the medical school and hospital was moved to Qasr El Eyni Street in Cairo. The hospital was renamed as "Qasr El Eyni hospital".
In 1838, The first school for midwifery was established in Qasr El Eyni Hospital.
In 1848, Clot Bey resigned and went back to France.
In 1855, Clot Bey was re-appointed director of medical school and Qasr El Eyni Hospital.
In 1858, Clot Bey returned to France for health reasons.
In 1925, the medical school and Qasr El Eyni Hospital joined Cairo University. Dr. Welson was appointed as the new director of the hospital.
From 1929 to 1940, Dr. Aly Basha Ebrahim was appointed the Dean of the faculty and the director of the hospital.
In 1980, the Qasr El Eyni hospital was closed and the building was taken down.
In 1984, a contract for building the new Qasr El Eyni hospital was awarded to a French consortium formed from Sogya Company, Eypoty De Franc company and Set Folky.
In 1995, the new hospital buildings were completed. The cost of the new hospital was over 800 million French francs or around 150 million Egyptian pounds.
In November 1995, Cairo university started the first employment stage of the new Qasr El Eyni hospital.
On April 8 1996, former-president Hosni Mubarak and the President of France, Jacques Chirac inaugurated the new Qasr El Eyni hospital building.
Specialized units[edit]
Gastro-enteritis
Qasr El Eyni Blood and Vessels Lab
Intensive Care Centre
Eyes Bank
Specialized Medical Biochemistry Experimentation Unit
The Development of Medical Education centre
Liver and Digestive System Endoscopy
Clinical Toxicology Centre
Fungi Research Centre
Diagnosis and Therapy of Bilharzial Liver
Genetics Unit
The Unit of Renal Failure Therapy and Surgery
T.B. Research Unit
Measurement Unit for Fitness and Disability for Occupational Diseases
Tumor Radiological Therapy and Nuclear Medicine Centre
Tumor Symptoms Test Unit
Open-Heart Surgery Unit
The Physiological Research Unit
Chromosome Tissue Transplant Research Unit
Speech and Listening Therapy Unit
Nose and Snoring Therapy Unit
Cochlea Transplant, Ear Lab and Bank Unit
Epilepsy Therapy Research Unit
Leprosy Unit
Ophthalmologic Laser Diagnosis and Therapy
Diagnosing Parasitology Unit
Medical Scanning and Diagnostics Unit
Ultrasonic Diagnosis Centre
Disintegrating Urinary Tracts Stones Unit
Guest House, Catering and 'Fast Food' Meals Unit
Special Medical Centre in the Pediatric Hospital
Diabetic Children, Endocrinology and Metabolism Care Unit
Functional and Microscopic E.N.T. Unit
Nursing Development Research Centre
Preservation, Redressing and Transplanting of the Tissue of the Motor System Centre
Manial University Hospital
Virus Unit
Allergy and Immunological Problem Unit
Faculty of Dental Medicine Specialized Units
Faculty of Nursing Specialized Units
Learning Resource Center for surgical skills and training [3]
International Relations Office [4]