Rangpur Medical College (RpMC) is a public medical college located in Rangpur, Bangladesh. The college is founded in 1970 and affiliated with Rajshahi Medical University.
Contents
1 History
2 Campus
3 Academics
4 Extracurricular activities
5 Photo Gallery
6 References
7 External links
History[edit]
To meet the growing needs of modern medicine the government established a medical college in Dhap, Rangpur (on the property of Pandit family of Rangpur) in 1970 with a 500-bed teaching hospital. The first batch of 50 students were admitted to Rangpur Medical College, affiliated with Rajshahi University, in 1971. Currently, the yearly intake has been increased to more than two hundreds. 44rd batch is doing intern duty. And most recent batch of 2021 is 50th.
Campus[edit]
The campus of Rangpur Medical College is located in the northwest area of Rangpur, Bangladesh. It is 210 kilometres from the Rajshahi District and 330 kilometres from Dhaka and is located next to the inter-country highway that connects India to Nepal.
There is a three-storey college building and a five-storey residential building with 1200 beds.
Academics[edit]
The admission process of undergraduate MBBS course for all government medical colleges in Bangladesh is conducted centrally by the Director of Medical Education under DGHS under the Ministry of Health (Bangladesh). The test comprises a written MCQ exam, which is held simultaneously in all government medical colleges on the same day throughout the country. Candidates are selected for admission based on national merit and district, whether they are sons or daughters of freedom fighters, and to fill tribal quotas. For foreign students, admission is through the embassy of Bangladesh in their respective countries. The academic calendar for different years is maintained by respective departments. Aside from the MBBS course there are post graduation courses in surgery, medicine, gynaecology and paediatrics. Postgraduate and diploma courses admission tests are conducted by the medical college. The admission test consists of the written MCQ exam. The medical college have separate dental unit & offers Bachelor of Dental Surgery (BDS) course.
Extracurricular activities[edit]
SANDHANI, Medicine Club, and Friends Foundation are voluntary organizations of students of this medical college.
Photo Gallery[edit]