The Sindh Institute of Urology & Transplantation (SIUT) is a dialysis & kidney transplant centre located in Pakistan.[1] SIUT was founded by Dr. Adibul Hasan Rizvi and it is Pakistan's largest kidney disease center,[2][3] as well as Pakistan's largest public sector health organisation. It began as a department of urology at the government-run Civil Hospital in 1970[4] and became autonomous in 1991. Ten to twelve transplants are performed weekly, and in 2003, doctors at SIUT performed Pakistan's first liver transplant.[4] In 2004, a child care unit was opened.[5]
All services provided by SIUT, including dialysis and transplantation, are provided free of cost.[4][6]
Contents
1 SIUT Chablani Medical Center Sukkur
2 Introduction and background
3 Indoor facilities
3.1 Clinical laboratory
3.2 Indoor ward
4 Emergency (ER) and Outpatient Department (OPD) Block
5 Operation Theater Complex
5.1 Kidney transplant
6 See also
7 References
8 External links
SIUT Chablani Medical Center Sukkur[edit]
Sindh Institute of Urology & Transplantation (SIUT)
SIUT Chablani Medical Centre
Geography
Location Minaret Road، Takkar Muhalla,, Sukkur, Sindh, Pakistan
Organisation
Type Specialist and teaching
Services
Emergency department Yes
Beds 110
History
Opened 2012 by Prof Dr. Adibul Hasan Rizvi
Links
Website www.siut.org
Establishing SIUT, Sukkur, was an innovative response to the need of the people of Sindh was planned in the year 2009. Since SIUT holds human life valuable and healthcare as the people's birthright, kidney patients "are not allowed to die because they cannot afford to live". Dr Rizvi anticipates the needs of his patients and responds accordingly. To make dialysis accessible, he conceptualized a network of satellite centers in various parts of Pakistan to save patients the trouble of commuting from far-flung areas of Sindh, southern parts of Punjab and Baluchistan to go for this procedure twice a week as far as Karachi.[7][8]
Most of the patients visiting the SIUT in Karachi did not go back for a follow-up and put their health at risk, it was costly for people hailing from those areas to go to Karachi for their kidney disease and its treatment, and the quest for a solution was launched. As Sukkur is the center of junction between provinces of Pakistan therefore it is in easy reach for people from other provinces to approach the SIUT at Sukkur for treatment of kidney diseases.[6][9]
Introduction and background[edit]
In 2009 the search for a suitable place to establish a unit of SIUT in Sukkur started. Dr Rizvi and his team's search ended at the historical Chablani Hospital and Maternity Home at the Minaret Road, near Historical Monument of Sukkur Mir Masum Shah minaret. The hospital was established as a maternity home by a woman named Dr Chablani in 1930. She did her MBBS from India and shifted to Sukkur to serve its people. However, the hospital was in bad shape and was not being run properly, recalled Dr. Adibul Hasan Rizvi, then SIUT team took over the hospital and started constructing the SIUT unit in the same year 2009.[10]
At last on 2 February 2012 Prof. Dr. Adibul Hasan Rizvi, Director Sindh Institute of Urology and Transplantation, along with a team of doctors and paramedical staff inaugurated SIUT-Chablani Medical Center Sukkur. Initially as a day care Dialysis Center with 16 Haemodialysis machines and OPD, which shall facilitate a large number of underprivileged patients of Upper Sindh, Lower Punjab & Baluchistan.[11]
Indoor facilities[edit]
Clinical laboratory[edit]
On 3 October 2013, a special ceremony was held at the Sindh Institute of Urology and Transplantation (SIUT) Chablani Medical Center to dedicate its clinical laboratory in memory of Dr Tanveer Abbasi a renowned writer, poet and intellectual of Sindh.[12]
Indoor ward[edit]
In second phase in April 2014, SIUT Chablani Medical center was upgraded to a full-fledged hospital, having 36-bed in its indoor ward. The indoor facilities reported 1,256 indoor admissions in same year and 33,918 patients went to the thrice-a-week outpatient clinic, 16,403 dialysis sessions were performed with 16 Hemodialysis machines, 2,400 patients received lithotripsy, the laboratory carried out 111,913 tests and 4,254 surgeries.[8][9]
Emergency (ER) and Outpatient Department (OPD) Block[edit]
On Thursday 5 November 2015 The Chablani Medical center (SIUT Sukkur) opened a 24-hour emergency out-patient department (OPD) to provide emergency services to kidney patients, announced Dr. Adibul Hasan Rizvi while addressing a press conference. He added that 90 patients are provided with the facility of dialysis every day at the newly-opened OPD. At least PKR= 5,000 to PKR= 6,000 is needed every time a patient undergoes dialysis and some of the patients have to go through the process twice a week, Dr. Rizvi said. Similarly, lithotripsy charges for removing one centimetre stone are PKR= 40,000. "We are moving forward in phases to provide better treatment to the kidney patients, as free medical treatment with dignity is the birth right of every citizen," said Dr Rizvi.
As per their mission, the SIUT aims to provide free medical treatment to people with dignity. Hope, that with the launch of 24 hours emergency OPD, more people will avail the benefits of modern medical treatment.[7]
Operation Theater Complex[edit]
On 3 October 2015, SIUT performed the ground-breaking ceremony of the operation theater block, for which the Feroza Hasham Foundation donated PKR= 60 million. The foundation initially donated the amount to be utilised in Karachi. However, a new operation theater block was needed in Sukkur for which the funds were used instead. The ground breaking of the new four-storey building was performed by a kidney patient, named Sanaullah Shaikh, who had a major surgery on Thursday. The complex will consist of a state-of-the-art operation theatre, an intensive care unit (ICU) and a kidney transplantation facility. The foundation will also help provide more facilities to the patients.[10]
The Operation Theater Complex was completed with PKR =260/= million and was finally inaugurated on the Saturday 27 April 2019 having four State-of-the-art Operation theaters with a total capacity of 60 beds of which 10 are in the surgical ICU.[13]
Kidney transplant[edit]
SIUT has been at the forefront of promoting renal transplantation for over three decades and has performed nearly 6000 renal transplants from family donations. SIUT is performing deceased organ donation since two decades as one person loses his fight to live every 3 minutes due to end stage organ failure in the country.
First renal transplant was performed at SIUT Chablani Medical Center, Sukkur on Sunday 28 April 2019. Two successful transplants were carried out by the SIUT doctors, under the aegis of Dr Adibul Hasan Rizvi. A wife donated her kidney to her husband and a brother donated his kidney to his younger brother. Both patients hailed from Sukkur.[9]
See also[edit]
Adeebul Hasan Rizvi
Ghulam Muhammad Mahar Medical College