The Amman Baccalaureate School (ABS) is a private, fee-paying school and non profit organization, licensed by the Jordanian Ministry of Education. It is a coeducational day school, and prepares its students for the International Baccalaureate Diploma and Certificates as school leaving qualifications. The school is situated on the west side of Amman in Jordan, and was established in 1981 by the Hashemite Society for Education, a charitable society registered with the Ministry of Social Development. ABS' educational and administrative policies are set by the school's Board of Trustees, chaired by Princess Sarvath al-Hassan, with Princess Sumaya bint Hassan serving as Deputy Chair.
Contents
1 Accreditation
2 Facilities
3 Students and faculty
4 Activities
5 Notable alumni
6 References
7 External links
Accreditation[edit]
ABS is accredited by the Council of International Schools (CIS) and the New England Association of Schools and Colleges (NEASC). It is also a Regional Member of the Round Square Conference of Schools.
Facilities[edit]
Each school section has its own facilities which include labs, ICT rooms and spacious playgrounds; most classrooms are equipped with interactive boards. The Sports Complex building and the track and field stadium serve the entire student body by providing for a wide range of athletics and other sporting activities. The Art and Performing Arts Departments also have classrooms and display areas, featuring paintings by celebrity artists. The school also has a fully equipped theater which accommodates an audience of 400 and is fully utilized by students and the community on a regular basis.
Students and faculty[edit]
Student enrollment is currently around 1160 students, with over 180 teaching and ancillary staff. 14 nationalities are represented amongst the student population.
Its original principal was Mr. Rehani (Lebanon), then followed by Mr. David Phillips (UK).
The original teaching staff included Mrs. Claire Issa (Jordan), Mrs. Jenan Toufaha (Jordan), Mrs. Marina Rashid (Cuban-American), Mr. Martin Keast (UK), Ms. Sarah Price (UK), Mr. Peter Ashton (UK), Mrs. Paula Ashton (UK), Ms. Romney Noonan (UK), and Mrs. Afaf Abdo (Jordan).
Activities[edit]
Various student clubs and sports teams are part of the school's student life, as well as a large number of conferences such as the Model United Nations. In 2010 the Model United Nations Club at the Amman Baccalaureate School was accredited and officially became THIMUN affiliated. The Amman Model United Nations (AMMUN) conference is located in the Amman Baccalaureate School. A student council acts as a mediator between the student body and the administration.
Notable alumni[edit]
Princess Salha bint Asem
Princess Yasmine bint Asem
Princess Sara bint Faisal
Princess Badiya bint Hassan
Prince Rashid bin Hassan
Prince Hashim bin Hussein