Aviano American High School (also referred to as Aviano Middle/High School) is a European Department of Defense Education Activity secondary school located on the Italian owned NATO Air Base in Aviano, Italy which hosts the 31st Fighter Wing. The majority of students are dependents of active duty military personnel, DoD employees, contractors and diplomats, although a small percentage are children of other English speaking expatriates or local Italian residents.
As of the 2008–2009 school year Aviano Middle School and Aviano High School were joined into one school serving grades 6-12. It is classified as a Division II school in DoDDS Europe.
The school's mascot is the saint.
Contents
1 Athletics
1.1 Fall
1.2 Winter
1.3 Spring
2 Extracurricular
3 Student government
4 Advanced/Accelerated and International Baccalaureate (IB) courses
4.1 English
4.2 History/Social Studies
4.3 Math
4.4 Science
4.5 Other
4.6 International Baccalaureate
5 See also
6 References
Athletics[edit]
The athletic program at Aviano Middle/High School is open to high school students and some middle school students. Competitions take place throughout the year in the DoDDS Europe Division II league as well as the American International Schools Italian League. Athletes follow the DoDDS Europe athletic code.
Fall[edit]
Football
Cross country
Volleyball Women
Volleyball Men
Tennis
Cheerleading
Swimming (community sponsored)

Winter[edit]
Basketball Men and Women
Wrestling
Cheerleading
Swimming (community sponsored)
Air Force JROTC drill team (AFJROTC sponsored)

Spring[edit]
Track and field
Softball
Baseball
Soccer Men and Women
Extracurricular[edit]
Clubs, organizations, and events exist for students to join or take part in:
Academic Bowl
Air Force JROTC (offered as a class)
Air Force JROTC Drill Team
Book Club
Cisco (offered as a class)
Creative Connections
Drama/Theatre
Future Business Leaders of America (FBLA)
Future Educators Association (FEA)
Future Educators Association Honor Society (must be selected to join)
Hinterbrand outdoors club
International Leadership Institute (ISLI)
Lingua Fest Language Festival
Math Counts
Model U.S. Senate
National Honors Society (must be selected to join)
National Junior Honor Society (must be selected to join)
Peer Mediation
Robotics Club
Student 2 Student
Student newspaper (offered as a class)
Tutoring
Yearbook (offered as a class)
Student government[edit]
The purpose of the student government at Aviano is to provide everyone with a chance to have a say in what goes on in the student body. The student government acts as advocates to the administration on behalf of students. They also organize school events such as pep rallies and dances. Each office is headed by a President, Vice President, Secretary, Treasurer, and a Public Relations officer.
Executive Office - Serves as main advocates for the school, handles school wide issues. Officers are elected by the students.
Senior Class - Handles senior issues and events including graduation. Officers are elected by 12th grade students
Junior Class - Organizes the Junior and Senior Prom, handles Junior issues, officers are elected by 11th grade students
Sophomore Class - Handles Sophomore issues, officers are elected by 10th grade students
Freshmen Class - Handles Freshmen issues, officers are elected by 9th grade students
Advanced/Accelerated and International Baccalaureate (IB) courses[edit]
Aviano Middle/High School offers Honors and Advanced Placement (AP) courses for high school students.
English[edit]
Honors English(9th)
Honors World Literature (10th) - Joint with Honors World Hist
AP Language and Composition (11th)
AP English Literature (12th)
History/Social Studies[edit]
Honors History (9th)
Honors World History (10th) - Joint with Honors World Lit
AP U.S. History (11th-12th)
AP Government (11th-12th)
Math[edit]
AP Calculus
AP Statistics
Science[edit]
AP Biology
AP Human Anatomy and Physiology
Other[edit]
AP Psychology
AP Economics
There are online AP courses
International Baccalaureate[edit]
IB courses are available and offered online
The Honors World Literature and History classes are combined classes. Students who take one must take the other and receive a joint performance grade that is averaged together.
The AP classes are weighted grades on a student's GPA.
See also[edit]
Vicenza American High School
Naples American High School
American Overseas School of Rome
Marymount International School of Rome
American School of Milan
Aviano Air Base
Military brats
DODDS European Championships
List of high schools in U.S. territories
http://www.dodea.edu/AvianoMHS/
hide
vte
International schools in Italy
Lazio
Rome
Lycée français Chateaubriand Institut Saint Dominique Deutsche Schule Rom Scuola Giapponese di Roma Liceo Español Cervantes Scuola Svizzera di Roma St. George's British International School New School Rome American Overseas School of Rome Rome International School St. Stephen's School Rome
Lombardy
Milan
Lycée Stendhal de Milan German School of Milan Scuola Giapponese di Milano Scuola Svizzera di Milano The British School of Milan American School of Milan International School of Milan
Varese
European School, Varese
Abruzzo
Lanciano
Canadian College Italy
Apulia
Brindisi
QSI International School of Brindisi
Campania
Naples
Naples American High School
Friuli-Venezia Giulia
Aviano
Aviano American High School
Liguria
Genoa
Deutsche Schule Genua International School in Genoa
Piedmont
Turin
International French School of Turin
Tuscany
Florence
Lycée Victor Hugo International School of Florence
This list is incomplete