Beijing City International School (BCIS) (北京乐成国际学校; Běijīng Yuèchéng Guójì Xuéxiào) is an independent co-educational not-for-profit day school offering an international curriculum for toddler to twelfth grade students.
It has gained a spot as a prospective member of the European Council of International Schools (ECIS) and is a regular member of the Council of International Schools (CIS), being accredited by The Western Association of Schools and Colleges (WASC). BCIS is also an IB World school, as well as a member of the Association of China and Mongolia International Schools (ACAMIS). BCIS is fully authorized for the Primary Years Programme (PYP), Middle Years Programme (MYP) and the Diploma Programme (DP) with the International Baccalaureate Organization (IBO).
As of August 2014, BCIS is spread across two purpose-built campuses, the first being its 51,000 square meter main campus on Baiziwan Nan Er Rd, which is the base for all students from Grades 1 to 12. The main campus is home to two of the school's three divisions, namely the Elementary School (Grades 1 to 5) and the Secondary School (Grades 6 to 12). The second campus, the purpose-built Early Childhood Center (ECC), is located just 1 kilometer away at No. 11 Dongbai St (adjacent to Shuangjing Bridge), and is used by students from Toddler to Kindergarten (age 2 to 6 years). BCIS can offer enrollment not only to foreign students but also to Chinese national students, as the school is registered with the Education Committee of Chaoyang District.
Contents
1 History
2 Student life
2.1 Student Support Services
2.2 Library
2.3 Athletics
2.4 Enrichment Activities
3 Tuition
4 Academics
4.1 IDEATE Program
5 Accreditation
6 Facilities
6.1 Main Campus (opened 2005)
6.2 Early Childhood Center Campus (opened 2014)
7 References
8 External links
History[edit]
The school opened in 2005 with less than 60 students ranging from Kindergarten to Grade 6. The Secondary school building opened the following year, and the class of 2008 was the first graduating class. BCIS was also an Olympic Model Education School for the 2008 Beijing Olympics. In 2009, BCIS gained its first-ever graduate. In August 2014, the school opened a second campus; the purpose-built Early Childhood Center (ECC), located just 1 km to the west of the main campus and provides education for younger children, from Toddler to Kindergarten.
Student life[edit]
Student Support Services[edit]
BCIS provides students with Counseling, Learning Support, and University Guidance services.[1]
Library[edit]
There are three libraries at BCIS, one in each part of the school, namely the ECC, ES, and SS. The library is staffed with teacher librarians who are also experienced educators. They collaborate with homeroom and subject teachers to integrate library and information seeking skills into the curriculum and plan and implement reading and literature appreciation activities. There is a parent zone created in the ES library to provide information and resources about supporting children's personal, social, and emotional development. [2]
Athletics[edit]
"BCIS is a full member of three sports conferences: The International Schools Athletic Conference (ISAC), which operates across Beijing and Tianjin; The Association of China and Mongolia International Schools (ACAMIS), which covers all of China and Mongolia; Junior International Schools Athletics Conference (JISAC), with membership from many international elementary schools in Beijing.
Within these conferences, secondary school students have the opportunity to participate in soccer, volleyball, basketball teams over a season of approximately 8 weeks for each sport. There are also one-off tournaments in badminton, table tennis, tennis, cross-country running, golf and track & field athletics. Opportunities also exist for elementary students to enjoy seasons of soccer, European handball, T-ball / coach-pitch softball, as well as one-off tournaments for table tennis, mini-volleyball, badminton, and track & field athletics."[3]
Enrichment Activities[edit]
"BCIS Enrichment activities (EAs) aim to inspire and empower students to engage in authentic experiential learning activities complementing their curricular learning. EAs substantiate BCIS’s balanced holistic education, which encourages the discovery of lifelong interests and striving to always do one’s best. Opportunities for social growth, where students engage with like-minded community members, result from these rich, authentic experiences."[4]
Tuition[edit]
In 2015 the tuition for the year was 220,000 renminbi ($35,442 U.S. dollars). China Daily ranked Beijing City as the 6th most expensive private school in Beijing.[5]
Tuition Fee Chart - Annual Payment (2018-2019)[6]
Grades Quoted in RMB Amount in USD
Toddler 199,100 29,405
Nursery 213,600 31,546
Pre-Kindergarten 228,100 33,688
Kindergarten 240,000 35,445
Grades 1 - 5 240,000 35,445
Grades 6 - 8 260,000 38,399
Grades 9 - 10 280,000 41,353
Grades 11 - 12 280,000 41,353
Academics[edit]
BCIS offers all three programs of the International Baccalaureate Organization (IBO) - International Baccalaureate Primary Years Programme (IB PYP), International Baccalaureate Middle Years Programme (IB MYP), IB Diploma Programme (IB DP).[7] Courses at BCIS are taught in English while offering three first language courses: English, Chinese or Korean. Second Language includes English, Chinese and Spanish.
Students in their second semester of Grade 10 have the opportunity to decide which diploma they want to pursue in Grade 11 and 12. The choices are the IB Diploma Programme diploma, and BCIS's high school diploma (known as IDEATE program).
IDEATE Program[edit]
IDEATE challenges students to pursue their own ideas and transform their learning through meaningful educational pursuits. It is designed to celebrate and develop students’ strengths, talents, and skills in ways that will support any future aspirations. Flexibility within the program allows for a personalized avenue towards post-secondary education and a chance to focus on areas of their choosing. IDEATE will challenge and inspire students to achieve their potential.[8]
Accreditation[edit]
BCIS is an IB World school authorized by the International Baccalaureate to develop and deliver courses within the framework of the IB Primary Years Programme, the IB Middle Years Programme and the IB Diploma Programme. BCIS is also accredited by the Council of International Schools and the Western Association of Schools and Colleges (WASC). BCIS can offer enrollment not only to foreign students but also to Chinese national students, as the school is registered with the Education Committee of Chaoyang District.
Facilities[edit]
Main Campus (opened 2005)[edit]
The main campus has the Elementary School and Secondary School buildings, which house more than 50 classrooms. The two buildings are connected by an enclosed bridge on the 2nd and 3rd floor. The campus has two libraries, one for each main building. The sports complex includes a gym as well as a 25-meter-long, heated, six-lane swimming pool. Also an amphitheatre designed to lead to the theatre and underground classrooms. Other facilities include:
Fitness center
300-seat theater
Astroturf 11-a-side soccer field
3 Outdoor tennis/basketball courts
Outdoor amphitheater
Several science laboratories
Music and drama studios
Visual arts studios
Soundproof recording studio
Green-screen photography/filming studio
2 Cafeterias
1 Community kitchen
1 DP student lounge
1 Rooftop garden
Early Childhood Center Campus (opened 2014)[edit]
The ECC campus houses around 20 large classrooms and is an eco-friendly facility. It is currently in the application process for LEED Certification to the Gold Standard. Other facilities include:
Library
Spacious specialist classrooms, including music, movement/dance and art
Common dining areas
Indoor and outdoor play areas
Child-friendly learning kitchens
Gymnasium
Storytelling area and puppet theater
Theater
Rooftop gardens
Special magnetic interactive wall displays