The British School of Guangzhou
Simplified Chinese 广州英国学校
Traditional Chinese 廣州英國學校
show
Transcriptions
The British School of Guangzhou (BSG; Chinese: 广州英国学校) is a British international school in Baiyun District, Guangzhou, China.[1] The school caters to students from the ages of 1 to 18.[2]
Contents
1 Administration
2 Curriculum
3 Student body
4 Location and facilities
5 Global Initiatives
6 Collaborations
7 References
Administration[edit]
The British School of Guangzhou was founded in 2005[3] by the British Schools Foundation. In August 2013, the school was acquired by Nord Anglia Education.[4][5]
Curriculum[edit]
The school follows the English National Curriculum (ENC), one of three main internationally recognised curricula. Students who graduate from ENC schools can choose to study in universities worldwide, usually without requiring to sit additional examinations. Recent academic results at The British School of Guangzhou convey its success and growing reputation as a top global international school.[6]
Student body[edit]
School enrolment has grown considerable in recent years[when?] with in excess of 1200 students now attending day school. All students are international passport holders as Chinese students are not permitted to attend. Over 50 nationalities are represented.[citation needed]
Location and facilities[edit]
The British School of Guangzhou is located 9 km directly north of the heart of the city of Guangzhou, China. The school opened in 2005 and moved to its current South Lake Campus in 2008, where it now educates all students aged 1-18.
South Lake Campus South Lake Campus is home to three school buildings with grounds that stretch over 38,561m².
Nanhu Building Opened in August 2008, 10,550m² of indoor space has been developed into 35 classrooms, four EAL rooms, five science labs, three music rooms, two ICT suites, an art studio, recording studio, dance studio, indoor sports hall, dining hall and a 250-seat theatre.
Hillside Building The Hillside building opened in August 2014, adding 1,620m² of usable indoor space to South Lake campus for younger Primary students. This purpose built facility has 10 classrooms, a multipurpose hall, music room, art studio and an IT hub contained within a reading room. Two key features surrounding the building are a covered playground and an outdoor performance amphitheatre.
Secondary Building The Secondary building adds 2,062m² of usable indoor space to the South Lake campus and a seating area for study or socialising. Opened in January 2016, the building added needed facilities to specifically support older students. The interior will include 15 classrooms, two art studios, a large Sixth Form study lounge, library and a multipurpose indoor hall.[citation needed]
South Lake Outdoor Facilities With the opening of the new Secondary extension, outdoor spaces available expanded to include three football pitches, two tennis courts, two extended hard-court areas, a golf zone, climbing wall and heated swimming pool, plus three large outdoor spaces designed specifically to encourage play or social interaction and as an alternative to regular classroom study areas.
The school operates a comprehensive private bus service that spans the city and is used by approximately 80% of all students.
Global Initiatives[edit]
Nord Anglia Education students are connected through Global Campus, an initiative which use online communities to connect students with their international counterparts.[7] The program offers a wide range of activities undertaken in school, online or at destinations around the world.[8]
Collaborations[edit]
Juilliard-Nord Anglia Performing Arts Programme
In February 2015, Nord Anglia Education and The Juilliard School announced a global collaboration[9] to enhance performing arts education for students in grades K-12. The program includes an embedded curriculum along with continued support and engagement with Juilliard alumni and affiliated artists.[10] It also includes professional development for teachers, a summer school and private lessons. The curriculum was rolled out in September 2015 and is expected to educate more than 20,000 students aged 3 to 18 by 2017.
The curriculum focuses on key works of music, dance and drama, and provides student with exciting opportunities to be visited by Juilliard alumni and for students to travel to New York for special workshops at The Juilliard School.[11]
CEO of Nord Anglia Education, Andrew Fitzmaurice, has criticized today's education for focusing too much on league tables and wants to "inspire children to engage with all their studies and develop a love of learning" through the Juilliard collaboration.[12]