Concordia College (CC) is an ELC–12 private, co-educational Lutheran school in Highgate, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. It was established in 1890.[2] The school has been an International Baccalaureate (IB) World School since January 2001 and offers the IB Primary Years, Middle Years and Diploma Programmes. Concordia is a Latin word meaning "harmony".
Contents
1 History
2 Campus
3 Curriculum
3.1 Middle school
3.2 Senior School
4 Co-curriculum
4.1 Musicals
4.2 Sport
4.2.1 IGSSA premierships
5 House system
6 Alumni
7 Associated people
8 See also
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links
History[edit]
The College's existence is largely due to the vision and enterprise of W. F. Peters, a Lutheran pastor in the Victorian country township of Murtoa, who purchased a private school founded there in 1887 by T. W. Boehm and established it in 1890 as a boys' college and training ground for future pastors and teachers. Lutheran leaders in South Australia recognised that the College was too important to the future of the church for it to remain in a remote country town in Victoria, so Concordia moved to its present Highgate site in 1905. Due largely to the efforts of Pastor P. B. Zweck, Concordia became a Christian co-educational secondary college in 1927, operating under the South Australian District Synod of the Lutheran Church of Australia. Today the College caters not only for Lutheran families, but for all students whose parents are prepared to support the educational program and Christian ethos.[citation needed]
In 2016 Concordia College amalgamated with the neighbouring St John's Lutheran Primary School to form the new ELC to Year 12 Concordia College. The amalgamation was largely made possible thanks to the endeavours of past principal Lester Saegenschnitter.
Campus[edit]
Concordia is located on two adjacent campuses in suburban Highgate, three kilometres south of the Adelaide city centre.[3] The St John's Campus caters for students from Early Learning Centre to Year 6 while the Concordia Campus caters for students in Years 7 to 12. The College grounds feature a combination of historic and modern architecture. At the Concordia Campus, the buildings surround a central grassed quadrangle.
The Concordia Campus includes:
The Chapel: The most notable of the buildings is the Chapel. The Chapel features a waterfall and fountain visible through a glass wall behind the altar, and a cross with a crown of thorns. The facility doubles as an assembly hall and a performance venue. It is also used for weddings and is made available for performances by local schools which do not have their own performance venue.[citation needed]
The Suaviter: Named from the school motto, the Suaviter is one of the original school buildings, and was formerly the Chapel. Retaining its stained glass windows, it has been converted into a conference and exhibition/display centre with catering facilities, where students participating in the hospitality curriculum receive training.[4]
The Yangadlitya Resource Centre was opened on 29 May 2006 by Ningali Cullen, possibly the first female indigenous Concordia College student (class of 1954). The College was given permission to use the name "Yangadlitya" (meaning "for the future") by the elders of the Kaurna people, who are the traditional owners of the land on which Concordia stands. The building is of a modern design with bold colours, with facades both to the quadrangle and Winchester street. It recently has also become home to the ICT department, which keeps computers updated.
Murtoa: A new addition to the school in 2010, this multipurpose building houses a television studio and media-editing suite as well as several multipurpose classrooms. The music centre has also been expanded into the building featuring new practice room space and a large acoustic rehearsal room. Built by Sarah Constructions, it features a modern design similar to the Yangadlitya building, including a skybridge connecting the two buildings. It was named after the town, Murtoa, Victoria, the original location of the school.
The Hamann Wing:
Upstairs: Year 9 and 10 classrooms, the LOTE (Languages other the English) rooms, and an open workspace.
Downstairs: Offices and services.
The Tech Centre: Facilities for woodworking, metalworking, plastics and electronics. (Also has two classrooms.)
The Gymnasium: One large gym area (used for basketball, netball, volleyball, etc.) which can be split into two, plus a weights room, a classroom, changing rooms, administrative facilities, and a large foyer (with mirrors, which is also used for dance and other activities).
The Atrium (formerly Maths Centre): Seven classrooms, and a storage room.[5]
The Nautilus Centre: Opened by His Excellency The Honourable Hieu Van Le AC, 35th Governor of South Australia in 2017, the science building includes laboratories, classrooms and associated offices. It has a swinging pendulum which was purchased by the Ajaero family.
The Peter Schmidt Music Centre: Practice rooms, a computer room and an ensemble room. Named after former Head of Music, Peter Schmidt
The Drama Centre: A configurable performance area with lights, sound and video facilities. The main performance space features a movable seating system enabling it to be used for a wide variety of corporate, drama and musical performances. This building was the original school gym.
The Canteen: Food and drink available for purchase at recess and lunchtimes.
Various outdoor sporting facilities: tennis courts, netball courts, ovals, etc.
On 31 October 2016, a new building was opened on Winchester Street containing more classrooms upstairs, as well as several administrative offices, a new Student Services Office and a Year 12 common room downstairs. Some of the Hamann wing and a locker area have been demolished to make way for this project.
Curriculum[edit]
Middle school[edit]
The Concordia College Middle School Curriculum in Years 7 - 10 incorporates the International Baccalaureate Middle Years Programme (IBMYP). Students in Years 7 and 8 undertake a common course, except in 'Language B', where they choose from German or Indonesian. An after-hours Special Interest Music Program is available to selected students in Year 8. Students in Years 9 and 10 are able to make subject choices in The Arts and Technology learning areas. Two further components of the Year 10 course are The Personal Learning Project and The Personal Learning Plan (PLP). The latter helps students plan for their future by making informed decisions about course and subject choices at Years 11 and 12, as well as possible career pathways. Details about the subjects on offer at Concordia in Years 7 - 10 can be found in the MYP Curriculum Handbook.
Senior School[edit]
The IB Middle Years Programme in Years 7 - 10 prepares students to undertake one of two pathways for Year 11 and 12 students at Concordia College:
The South Australian Certificate of Education (SACE)
Vocational Education and Training (VET) in the SACE
Student leadership is strongly encouraged at Concordia[6] and leadership opportunities are offered at each year level. Students from each year level may participate in Forum (Student Representative Council) or become a House Captain, Student Leader (Prefect), Deputy School Captain or School Captain (Head Boy & Head Girl) in Year 12. Students may also volunteer for one of the leadership roles at their year level, for example, Year 9 Ambassador or Year 12 Action Leader.
Co-curriculum[edit]
Students can choose to participate in a range of co-curricular and extra-curricular programs and activities according to their individual interests and abilities. Co-curricular programs and activities offered include national subject competitions, career counselling and work experience, excursions, field camps and instrumental music tuition. Other extra-curricular programs include Middle School, Year 9 & Senior School choirs, the annual College musical, Big Bands, School Orchestra, Concert Band, Music Ensembles (Concert Vocal, String, Percussion), Chapel music, Chess Club, Debating, Duke of Edinburgh's Award, Pedal Prix, Snow Trip, Writers' Club, Mind and Body Club, Electronics Club and House competitions.
Musicals[edit]
Concordia students may participate in the annual College musical. The musicals were performed at the Scott Theatre[7] until 2009, then moved to the Hopgood Theatre[8] for the musical Grease. The Sound of Music in April 2014 was the first Concordia musical to be held in the College Chapel. While Godspell was also held in the Chapel, the 2016 performance of Hairspray was once again in the Hopgood Theatre. The performances are generally held in March or April. A long-established tradition, these musicals are a showcase of the music and drama departments. In 2020, all performances of the College Musical were cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic, but a performance in the College Chapel without an audience was filmed. Musicals presented have included:
Year Musical
2021 Beauty and the Beast
2020 High School Musical
2019 The Addams Family
2018 Legally Blonde
2017 Annie
2016 Hairspray
2015 Godspell
2014 The Sound of Music
2013 Guys and Dolls
2012 Aladdin
2011 The Wizard of Oz
2010 Grease
2009 Children of Eden
2008 Oklahoma!
2007 Beauty and the Beast
2006 Cabaret
2005 Les Misérables
2004 Viva Mexico
2003 Little Shop of Horrors
2002 The Mikado
2001 Godspell
2000 42nd Street
1999 The Wizard of Oz
1998 Guys and Dolls
1997 Me and My Girl
Others in previous years have included: L'il Abner, Carousel, My Fair Lady, Annie Get Your Gun, The Boy Friend, Fiddler on the Roof, The Pirates of Penzance, Calamity Jane, Viva Mexico, Ruddigore, HMS Pinafore, Can You Imagine, Free As Air, A Penny For a Song, God So Loved, Where Is God, Anything Goes, Tom Sawyer, Salad Days, and Trial By Jury.
Sport[edit]
Concordia College is a member of the Sports Association for Adelaide Schools (SAAS), and the Independent Girls Schools Sports Association (IGSSA). The sports offered at the college include: basketball, cricket, cross country, football, hockey, netball, soccer, softball, swimming, tennis and volleyball. Students also have the opportunity to participate in:
Knockout Competitions – the College enters representative teams in statewide competitions in various sports such as basketball, netball and volleyball.
Sports Day – a whole school event, held annually in March at the Santos Stadium.
Interschool Athletics SSSSA (combined boys/girls) in Term 1; Achilles Cup (Boys) and IGSSA (Girls) competition in Term 3.
Swimming Carnival – a school event for Years 7 – 10, held in the last week of the school year at Unley Swimming Centre.
Interschool Swimming Carnivals organised by SSSSA (combined boys/girls) and IGSSA (girls only)
Lunchtime House Competitions in Netball and Volleyball
Gymnasium – all students can use the Gym for recreation with staff supervision
Weights Room – senior students can use the Weights Room for personal training with staff supervision
IGSSA premierships[edit]
Concordia College has won the following IGSSA premierships.[9]
Football - 2019
Volleyball (6) - 2012, 2013, 2015, 2018, 2019, 2020
House system[edit]
As with most Australian schools, Concordia College utilises a house system. There are currently four houses, three named after three of the streets surrounding the College and the fourth, Malvern after the neighbouring suburb.
House Colour Moniker
Cheltenham Green The Cheltenham Army
Highgate Blue The Highgate Heroes
Malvern Yellow The Malvern Lions
Winchester Red The Winchester Warriors
Students represent their house in a number of activities, including Sports Day, Swimming Carnival and lunchtime house sports. Students earn points for their house through participation in these activities, and the house with the most points at the conclusion of the school year is awarded the House Shield.
Alumni[edit]
Ernest George Moll, Australian poet[10]
Vern Schuppan, Motor racing driver
Ron Nagorcka, Contemporary composer, didjeridu and keyboard player
Errol Wayne Noack, First Australian National Service conscript to be killed in the Vietnam War[11]
John Noack, Australian rules footballer for Sturt and Geelong
Jay Schulz, Full Forward for Port Adelaide and Richmond
James Aish, Midfielder for Collingwood Football Club
Cameron Bayly, Cyclist for OCBC Singapore Cycling Team and Search2Retain Cycling Team
Kayla Itsines, Personal trainer, entrepreneur, and author
Connor Fearon, Cyclist for Kona Gravity / Enduro Team[12]
Odette England, Contemporary artist and photographer
Mason Redman, Australian rules footballer for Glenelg and Essendon
Amy Clark, Journalist/Podcast host
Associated people[edit]
Agnes Marie Johanna Dorsch,[13] teacher
Carl Friedrich Graebner,[14] headmaster 1905-1939
See also[edit]
List of schools in South Australia
List of Lutheran schools in Australia