This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Deutsche Schule der Borromäerinnen Alexandria" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Deutsche Schule der Borromäerinnen Alexandria (DSBA; Arabic: المدرسة الألمانية للقديس سان شارل بورومي بالإسكندرية) is a German-Egyptian school of encounter (dt. Begegnungsschule), which is supported by the Federal Office of Administration in Cologne, both in personnel and funding terms. It is mainly attended by Egyptian female pupils. The school is run by the Sisters of Mercy of St. Charles Borromeo, based in Kloster Grafschaft.[1]
It was recognised as a German school abroad by the Central Agency for German Schools Abroad (ZfA). [2]
Contents
1 History
2 See also
3 References
4 External links
History[edit]
The Deutsche Schule der Borromäerinnen Alexandria was founded in 1884 and was initially an educational institution for German and Austrian children, whose fathers were employed in the construction of the port of Alexandria. With the enlargement of the spectrum of pupils, a curriculum based on the model of the so-called higher school for daughters (dt. Höhere Töchterschule) was introduced in 1894.
After the expulsion of the German sisters in the First World War, they returned in 1922 to Alexandria to work again. Already in 1911, a commercial class was launched where the students learned accounts, shorthand and typewriting, and deepened their skills in foreign languages. In 1924, the first German teacher, appointed by the Foreign Office, undertook their service as teachers at the school. Continuously, the number of German teachers in parallel with the ever growing number of pupils increased.
After World War II, in 1946, Arabic became an official language taught at school. The first German secondary school leaving examination after grade 10 was conducted in 1958. In 1964, the first candidates registered for the Egyptian Thanaweya Amma school-leaving examination.
See also[edit]
Germany portal
Egypt portal
Schools portal
Deutsche Schule der Borromäerinnen Kairo