The Frankfurt International School e.V. (FIS) is an English-language day school founded in 1961 in Frankfurt, but located in Oberursel, Germany.
The main campus in Oberursel consists of a Primary School (Age 3 to Grade 1), Elementary School (Grades 2-5), and Upper School (Grades 6-12). A satellite campus called in Wiesbaden Naurod offers schooling for students from Age 3 to Grade 8.
Contents
1 Curriculum and accreditation
2 Faculty and staff
3 Facilities and technology
4 Extracurricular activities
5 External links
Curriculum and accreditation[edit]
FIS is accredited by the "New England Association of Schools and Colleges". It is also an International Baccalaureate World School and a founding member of that organization. The school implements a curriculum based on the principles espoused in the IB Primary Years Program and International Baccalaureate Diploma Program.
Subjects taught include, but are not limited to, Economics, Business, History, Geography, Psychology, Physics, Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, Computer Science, Design and Technology, Visual Arts, Music and Theater.
The school offers language instruction in German, English, Japanese and Korean, French and Spanish in the Grades 6-12.
Faculty and staff[edit]
The school employs faculty and staff from over 69 countries.
Facilities and technology[edit]
The facilities cover 16 acres (6.5 ha) in Oberursel, Germany and feature a historic administration building (known as "Old Main"), and the three separate divisional school buildings. A new wing was finished in 2006 ("The Da Vinci Wing") for the departments of Science, Performing & Visual Arts, and Design & Technology. The main campus has two all-weather sports fields and several playgrounds. A new cafeteria was completed in 2011, and the school's main auditorium was renovated in 2012. The school has a new Learning and Sports Center that houses multiple classrooms, a large gym in the center of the building and a fitness center is called "The Stroth Center ", who were among the founding families in 1961.
Extracurricular activities[edit]
The school's sports teams compete in volleyball, swimming, soccer, basketball, tennis, softball, baseball, golf, rugby, cross-country, and track and field. Each team competes in ISSTs or SCISs.
FIS has an after-school program.
FIS offers many non-athletic activities. In the field of the performing arts, students can participate in orchestra, band, choir, dance and drama. Student groups take part in the Model United Nations and maths competitions. Students can also take part in various charitable projects such as the Kalahari Experience, Clear Water Initiative, Girl Up, Operation Smile, Oceans Aware, Youth Against Prejudice, Wilderness International, HIV/Aids Awareness, the Poland Drive, and local Refugee House.
External links[edit]
FIS website
hide
vte
International schools in Germany
International schools in Germany by state and metropolitan region
Baden-
Württemberg
Stuttgart Region
SIS Swiss International School Stuttgart-Fellbach Stuttgart High School Alexander M. Patch American High School† Stuttgart American High School†
Mannheim Region
Heidelberg High School† Heidelberg Middle School†
elsewhere
Bad Saulgau: Toin Gakuen Schule Deutschland† Freiburg im Breisgau: DFG / LFA Freiburg Friedrichshafen: SIS Swiss International School Friedrichshafen Karlsruhe: European School, Karlsruhe Karlsruhe American High School†
Bavaria
Munich Region
European School, Munich Lycée Jean Renoir Japanische Internationale Schule München SIS Swiss International School Ingolstadt Bavarian International School Munich International School Munich American High School†
Nuremberg Region
Franconian International School Nurnberg American High School†
elsewhere
Augsburg: International School Augsburg Regensburg: SIS Swiss International School Regensburg
Berlin
Berlin Region
Französisches Gymnasium Berlin Japanische Internationale Schule zu Berlin Russian Embassy School in Berlin Berlin British School Berlin Cosmopolitan School Berlin Metropolitan School Berlin Brandenburg International School John F. Kennedy School, Berlin
Hamburg
Hamburg Region
Lycée Français de Hambourg Japanische Schule in Hamburg International School of Hamburg
Hesse
Frankfurt Region
European School, Frankfurt am Main Lycée français Victor Hugo (Frankfurt am Main) Japanische Internationale Schule Frankfurt Frankfurt International School ISF International School Frankfurt Rhein-Main Frankfurt American High School† Wiesbaden High School
elsewhere
Kassel: SIS Swiss International School Kassel
Lower Saxony
Hannover Region
International School Hannover Region
Elsewhere
Gloucester School†
North Rhine-
Westphalia
Cologne Bonn Region
École de Gaulle-Adenauer Liceo Italo Svevo King Fahd Academy† Bonn International School Independent Bonn International School St. George's School, Cologne Russian Consulate School in Bonn Bonn American High School†
Düsseldorf Region
Lycée français de Düsseldorf Japanische Internationale Schule in Düsseldorf International School of Düsseldorf ISR International School on the Rhine
Elsewhere
Kent School, Hostert King's School (Gütersloh)
Rhineland-Palatinate
Kaiserslautern High School Ramstein High School
Saarland
Saarbrücken
DFG LFA Saarbrücken
Saxony
Leipzig Region
Leipzig International School
Schleswig-Holstein
King Alfred School, Plön†
† defunct; Note: This list may be incomplete.
Authority control
VIAF 1 WorldCat