International School of Nanshan Shenzhen (ISNS; Chinese: 深圳南山国际学校), formerly the International School of Sino-Canada, is an international school in Taoyuan Sub-District (桃源街道), Nanshan District, Shenzhen, China.[1]
It is accredited by the New Brunswick Department of Education in Canada. It offers to its students an internationally recognized Canadian curriculum. ISNS is the first continuum IB World school in Shenzhen, China, authorized in the International Baccalaureate (IB) Primary Years Programme, Middle Years Programme and Diploma Programme.
ISNS was founded in 2002 through the co-operation of the Government of Canada, the Province of New Brunswick and Dr. Francis Pang. ISNS fulfills a local need for international education.
As of 2018 it is one of eight schools in Shenzhen designated for children of foreign workers.[2] The school guarantees a low student-teacher ratio, no greater than 25 students in kindergarten to grade 12. Every classroom is equipped with a SmartBoard and has access to class sets of macbooks and iPads. The campus includes a large gymnasium, full outdoor track and field, playground, table-tennis tables, basketball, and volleyball courts.
Contents
1 Curriculum
2 Admissions
3 Affiliated school
4 See also
5 References
6 External links
Curriculum[edit]
Accredited by the New Brunswick Department of Education in Canada, the International School of Nanshan Shenzhen offers to its students internationally recognized Canadian curriculum and in the framework of the International Baccalaureate (IB) Primary Years Programme, Middle Years Programme and Diploma Programme. Students have the option of receiving both a Canadian Diploma and IB Diploma should they be successful in meeting graduation requirements.
The educational programs and teaching methodologies are supported and reviewed by officials from Canada. Students also write Provincial assessments (Province of New Brunswick, Canada) to ensure the consistency of curriculum delivery.
The International School of Nanshan Shenzhen offers classes from Kindergarten to Grade 12, with Elementary, Middle School and High School sections. Students are also prepared to take the Standardized Admissions Test (SAT).
English as Additional Language (EAL) classes are offered to non-English speaking students based on a student assessment using the Cambridge System upon admission. Students also attend one Mandarin as a second language class each day.
As well as being linked with the Canadian Province of New Brunswick's Department of Education, ISNS is also proudly affiliated with UNESCO, and ACAMIS (Association of China and Mongolia International Schools).
Admissions[edit]
Applications for admissions at the International School of Nanshan Shenzhen are accepted throughout the academic year, which runs from August to June of the following year.
Affiliated school[edit]
Canadian International School of Beijing
See also[edit]
Education in Shenzhen