Utahloy International School
Simplified Chinese 广州誉德莱国际学校
Traditional Chinese 廣州譽德萊國際學校
show
Transcriptions
Utahloy International School Guangzhou (UISG) is a school with English-language class instruction in Baiyun District, Guangzhou.[1] It serves students aged 2-19 years. There are seven main native languages, including English, Chinese, Korean, French, Japanese, German and Spanish and UISG contains more than 50 nationalities students. The school proposes three kinds of programmes which are Primary Year programme, Middle-year programme and Diploma programme. Average of 18 students per class, with a teacher to student ratio of 1 to 8.
Contents
1 Academic accreditation
2 Primary years education
3 Middle years education
4 Diploma education
4.1 Group 1 (Literature)
4.2 Group 2 (Language Acquisition)
4.3 Group 3 (Individuals & Societies)
4.4 Group 4 (Experimental Sciences)
4.5 Group 5 (Mathematics)
4.6 Group 6 (The Arts & Electives)
5 Athletics
6 Student life
7 References
8 External links
Academic accreditation[edit]
UISG is accredited by the Council of International Schools (CIS) and Western Association of Schools and Colleges (WASC). It is authorized by the International Baccalaureate Organization to provide the IB Primary Years Programme (IBPYP), IB Middle Years Programme (IBMYP) and IB Diploma Programme (IBDP).
Primary years education[edit]
The IB Primary Years Programme, for students ages 3 to 12, focuses on the development of the whole child as an inquirer, in the classroom and in the world outside. Classroom teachers teach Language, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies, in integrated units of inquiry and in single subject lessons with the focus being on making trans-disciplinary connections. Specialist teachers are responsible for music, art, mother tongue language classes and physical education. An ICT specialist assists primary school teachers to implement ICT across the curriculum. English as a Second Language staff work across the grade levels as necessary.
Middle years education[edit]
The IB Middle Years Programme is a curriculum designed to meet the education needs of students between the ages 12 and 16. The Mother Tongue programme is implemented during these years providing with languages such as Mandarin, Korean, Japanese, French, German, Spanish, and Italian. The curriculum consists of nine components: The Arts, English, Language and Literature, Language Acquisition, Humanities, Mathematics, Physical & Health Education, Science, and Design. In addition to this, students are to complete their Community & Service requirements and their Personal Project by the end of their final year in the IB.
Diploma education[edit]
The IB Diploma Programme is aimed to prepare students for the competitiveness of Higher Education. At Utahloy International School Guangzhou all students aiming for the IB Diploma are required to study six subjects, up to four Higher Level and the rest Standard Level. A Higher Level subject represents a minimum of 240 hours of classroom study during the two-year period. A Standard Level subject represents a minimum of 150 hours of classroom study during the two-year period.
In addition, students follow a course in Theory of Knowledge, write an Extended Essay of 4000 words and complete a Creativity, Action and Service programme.
Subject options available at UISGZ for the academic program 2014-2016*:
Group 1 (Literature)[edit]
Course Available Higher Level Standard Level
English Literature Yes Yes
English Language & Literature Yes Yes
Korean Language & Literature Yes Yes
Mandarin Literature Yes Yes
Mandarin Language & Literature Yes Yes
Japanese Language & Literature Yes Yes
French Language & Literature Yes Yes
German Language & Literature Yes Yes
Spanish Literature Unconfirmed Unconfirmed
Self-Taught Literature No Yes
Group 2 (Language Acquisition)[edit]
Course Available Higher Lever Standard Level
English B Yes Yes
Mandarin B Yes Yes
Mandarin Ab Initio - Yes
French B No Yes
French B Ab Initio - -
Spanish B No Yes
Spanish Ab Initio - -
Japanese B No No
Korean B No No
Group 3 (Individuals & Societies)[edit]
Course Available Higher Level Standard Level
Business & Management Yes Yes
History not currently not currently
Geography Yes Yes
Economics Yes Yes
Psychology Yes Yes
Information Technology in a Global Society online online
Group 4 (Experimental Sciences)[edit]
Course Available Higher Level Standard Level
Biology Yes Yes
Chemistry Yes Yes
Physics Yes Yes
Design Technology Yes Yes
Environmental Systems and Society No Yes
Group 5 (Mathematics)[edit]
Course Available Higher Level Standard Level
Math Applications and Interpretations Yes Yes
Math Analysis and Approaches Yes Yes
Group 6 (The Arts & Electives)[edit]
Course Availability Higher Level Standard Level
Visual Arts Yes Yes
Music Yes Yes
Theatre Studies Yes Yes
Students also have the option to choose another subject from Groups 1-5.
Utahloy offers SAT and TOEFL preparation classes for senior students applying to universities and colleges worldwide.
Athletics[edit]
Utahloy is a member of ACAMIS (Association of China and Mongolia International Schools), SDRC (Southern Delta Region Conference), and participates in the PRC (Pearl River Conference) and NUX (Nanjing, Utahloy, Xiamen). Students from years 9 to 12 usually participate in the Orange Division in ACAMIS, Utahloy competes in Association Football, Basketball, Volleyball, Badminton, Cross-country, Golf, Table tennis, Tennis, and Swimming whilst competing against other international schools from all around China. Students between the ages of 11 to 14 participate in SDRC, competing in Association Football, Touch Rugby, Volleyball, and Basketball.
Student life[edit]
In the primary school, students are engaged in the classroom with the influences of the IB Learner Profile. It is important for the students to be engage outside the classroom to enhance the development of the whole child and provide an extension to the school curriculum. The secondary school provides both IBMYM and IBDP programmes. Like in the primary school, students in the secondary school have the opportunity to participate in activities outside the classroom.
Primary School Activities Secondary School Activities
Ballet Entertaining the Elderly
Baseball High School Model United Nations
Football Utahloy Foundation for Orphans
Badminton Roots and Shoots
Paper Crafts HOPE Foundation Club
Swimming Global Issues Network
Ice Skating Chinese Calligraphy and Art
Story Telling Cantonese Language and Culture club
Touch Ruby Chinese Language Tutoring
Water Sports Movie Making Club for Film Festival
Water Fun ESL Couleur de Chine
Table Tennis Student Magazine
African Music Photography Club
Alternative Printmaking Orchestra
Animation Ice Skating Club
AOC Investigator Student Production Club
Art Madness/Murals/Graffiti IB Mentor Programme
Board Games Maths Competition Club
Card Games Math Buddies
Chess Korean Literature and Movie Critique Club
Chinese Calligraphy Robotics and Computer Programming
Chinese Games Middle School Debating Club
Ten Pin Bowling High School Debating Club
Ultimate Frisbee Fitness Club
Cricket Girls App Competition
Design Tech Shares and Stock Trading Club
Flying Club Pilates
Fun with Food Modern Dance
Garden Party Cheer Leading
Guitar Club Year 12 study skills group
Hiking Club Rock Band
Hip Hoppers Club Guzheng Club
Jumping Games Middle & High School Cross-country
Kiwi Games - Tapuwai Tennis
Rhythmic Gymnastics Golf
- Table Tennis
- Student Council
- Show Rehearsals
- Marimba Club
- Spanish Language Magazine
- Craft Club
- Apprentice Club
- Joy in Action
- Arts Trip to NYC
- Design and Technology Club
- Korean Debating Club
- The Language and Cultural Exchange Programme
- DCODERS Dance Crew
Animal Welfare Club