Kardinia International College is an independent K-12 school located in Bell Post Hill, Geelong, Victoria, Australia. It is a triple campus college, residing on the site of the former Morongo Girls' College and has two other campuses, one in Lovely Banks, Geelong and another located in Chiang Mai, Thailand. Enrolment across the school is usually around 1800 full time students.[1]
Contents
1 History
1.1 Beginnings
1.2 20th Anniversary Celebrations
2 Principals
3 Structure
3.1 Senior School
4 House system
5 Facilities
5.1 Katsumata Centre
5.2 The Learning Commons
5.3 The Goodfellow Aquatic Centre
6 Campuses
6.1 Chiang Mai Sum Pun
6.2 The Grove Campus
7 College Song
8 Controversy
9 See also
10 References
11 External links
History[edit]
Beginnings[edit]
Kardinia International College was founded by the late Yoshimaro Katsumata (勝間田芳麿) who purchased Morongo's buildings, grounds, facilities and resources in mid-1995. It first opened in 1996 with 31 secondary students and 42 kindergarten children.[2] The International Baccalaureate has been implemented at the primary years level and at the Diploma level.
The word Kardinia is an Aboriginal word which means sunrise or new beginning.[2]
Gotemba Nishi High School, also owned by Katsumata, is a sister school to Kardinia International College.
The construction of a third campus and an Aquatic Centre were announced in 2015 as a part of the 20th anniversary celebrations.
In 2015, it was announced that founding principal, Mr John Goodfellow, would be retiring as principal after 20 years in the job. Mr Goodfellow remained involved with the college as a director and Sum Pun director. Mr David Fitzgerald took up the role of principal at the beginning of 2016 and continued in the role until 2018. On 1 January 2019, Catherine Lockhart became the College's third principal after being appointed from her previous role as Deputy Head at Woodcroft College in South Australia.[3]
20th Anniversary Celebrations[edit]
2015 marked an important milestone for the college, it was 20 years since the college began in 1996. The college grew from around 50 students to more than 2000 in 2015. Special events occurred to mark the very special occasion. The annual KICFest was turned into a spectacular event for the students and the public, it included a firework spectacular at the closing of the festival. A special stage production, Onwards, was produced to pay tribute to the 20 years of the college. A whole school photo was taken as well as each student receiving a special 20 years commemoration book outlining the important milestones of the college as well as recognising many achievements. Each student also receive a medallion in memory of the late founders, Mr and Mrs Katsumata. The college's new Aquatic Centre and the new Yr 5 Campus in Moorabool were also announced.
Principals[edit]
Period Principal
1996 – 2015 John Goodfellow
2016 – 2018 David Fitzgerald
2019 – current Catherine Lockhart
Structure[edit]
The college is divided into four distinct sections:
The Early Learning Centre incorporates a three- and four-year-old kindergarten, in addition to a pre-school.[4]
The Lower Primary Centre caters for prep, as well as grades one and two.[5]
The Upper Primary Centre contains grades three, four, five and six.[5]
The Senior School, for years seven to twelve.
Senior School[edit]
The Senior School utilises a vertical curriculum for years seven to ten. This system is based upon the individual choices of a student. At the beginning of each semester, students are issued with a unique timetable of seven subjects, based upon their preferences. This allows for students to focus heavily on one particular area, or elect to pursue one or more languages. This system does not allow free rein, however, with a minimum number of subjects which must be undertaken in each learning area.
For years 11 and 12, there are two options to undertake. The Victorian Certificate of Education (VCE) was first implemented in 2000, and is the main high school certificate for year 11 and 12 students in Victoria. In 2005, Kardinia offered the alternative of the International Baccalaureate Diploma. 33 students completed the International Baccalaureate in 2006. The school also implemented the International Baccalaureate Primary Years Program into the junior school. VET (Vocational Education and Training) courses are also available to willing students.
House system[edit]
Kardinia International College has four houses to which students are allocated, each having a historical meaning.
House Cowie[6] Gotemba[7] Morongo[8] Thomson[9]
Colour Green   Blue   Red   Yellow  
Named after The first squatter to settle on the college site. Named after Kardinia's sister school in Japan. The historic homestead originally built on the site in 1859. Named after the first mayor of Geelong Alexander Thomson.
Facilities[edit]
Katsumata Centre[edit]
In 2011, a gymnasium/weights room/ theatre complex was established in honour of the school's founders, the Katsumatas.
The Learning Commons[edit]
In 2014, a multi-purpose facility was built on location of the previous library in the centre of the senior school. The new facility consists of two buildings. The first is the Learning Commons which includes a library, IT support, offices, student study, photography rooms including a dark room, and classrooms. The second building consisting of classrooms, study rooms and staff offices.
The Goodfellow Aquatic Centre[edit]
As a part of the 20th anniversary celebrations, it was announced that an aquatic centre was to be built along Ballarat Rd. The new building includes two separate swimming pools. The construction of the pool commenced in April 2015 and was completed in July 2016. The centre was officially opened by the founding principal and its namesake, John Goodfellow.
Campuses[edit]
Chiang Mai Sum Pun[edit]
Students in Year 9 have the opportunity to travel to Chiang Mai, Thailand. Sum Pun Kardinia is the campus located in Chiang Mai. The duration of the trip is eight weeks, where they take part in many cultural activities such as: a cooking class, Buddhism studies, a community service project, attend a novice monk school and much more.
The Grove Campus[edit]
In 2015, construction began on a rural campus for year 5 students. The campus was completed in mid-2016 and includes farm animals, a learning space, veggie gardens as well as a caretaker's residence
College Song[edit]
The College Song 'Bridges To The Future' was composed by Debbie Howard.[citation needed]
Controversy[edit]
Several students were involved in the creation and distribution of a controversial DVD first seen in the media in October 2006. According to the college principal one student was expelled, along with a school investigation into two other students who "may have had some involvement". These students have since been expelled .[10]
See also[edit]
List of schools in Victoria
List of high schools in Victoria
Victorian Certificate of Education