The Kilmore International School (TKIS) is in Kilmore, Victoria, Australia. TKIS is a non-denominational international school offering year 3–12, and boarding from year 7. TKIS is a boarding and day school located in a rural setting approximately 1 hour from Tullamarine Airport in the township of Kilmore on the outskirts of Melbourne.
The school is a not-for profit enterprise listed on the Australian Charities and Not-for-profit (ACNC) register. The current TKIS principal is Peter Cooper.
The School's motto is "Excellentia Academica Persequenda" which translate to "In pursuit of Academic Excellence".
Contents
1 History
2 Campus and facilities
3 International Baccalaureate curriculum
4 English and other languages
5 Traditions
6 See also
7 References
8 External links
History[edit]
It was established in 1990 in the former Assumption College buildings, which were built in 1887 by the Marist Brothers of the Catholic Church. The site was purchased in the 1980s and renovated. The school opened in 1990 with two international students. In 2011, a Language Learning Centre was opened which now operates as the IB Centre. The school grounds contain a football oval, a soccer field, basketball courts and tennis courts.[1]
The school was a secondary school until 2009, when Years 5 and 6 were added. Years 3 and 4 were added as well, in 2015.[1]
Campus and facilities[edit]
The main campus is in Kilmore, Victoria. It is located approximately 1.5 km from the town centre. The main Campus is located on 40 White Street.
Classes are offered from Years 3 – 12 with boarding available from year 7.
Scholarships for tuition are available once a year for new and existing students.
International Baccalaureate curriculum[edit]
In Year 11 and 12, students partake in the International Baccalaureate Diploma Program (IBDP).
The IBDP is internationally recognised and depending on a score out of 45 split between 6 subjects worth 7 marks each and 3 marks from a philosophical study known as "Theory of Knowledge" or better known as "TOK" and a 4000 word research project known as the "Extended Essay". Assuming a student achieves the highest possible IB score, 45, the student is eligible for direct enrolment into prestigious universities throughout the world.
English and other languages[edit]
All courses are taught in English with ESL (English as a Second Language) support in conjunction with normal academic subjects.
Traditions[edit]
Football is one of the main competitive games students enjoy playing at the school.
Basketball is also very commonly played and every year the school holds two House Sport events.
In 2014, The 'House Music' competition was added, which occurs within the school's housing system. The 4 houses; Hudson (Red), Mitchell (Green), Rutledge (Gold) and Hume (Blue) competed for the House Music Trophy.
See also[edit]
List of schools in Victoria
List of boarding schools