Kormilda College was an Anglican and Uniting Church day and residential secondary college located at Berrimah in Darwin, Northern Territory, Australia. In August 2017 the school was bought by Haileybury (Melbourne) to become Haileybury Rendall School.
Contents
1 History
2 Kormilda today
3 Primary school
4 External links
History[edit]
Originally a World War II Army hospital that treated Australian soldiers and Japanese prisoners of war, the post-war property was converted to a QANTAS Transit Centre. For almost 20 years, international air passengers and crew were accommodated on site as they broke their journeys to Europe.
In 1967, the Commonwealth government acquired the property to create a post primary hostel and boarding school for Indigenous children from isolated locations. By early 1968 many of the buildings were renovated, repainted and converted into classrooms or bedrooms and the property became Kormilda College. Initial enrolment totalled 121 students from 27 Territory communities, pastoral stations and missions. Following self-government, the management of the College was transferred to the Northern Territory government.
In 1987 The NT government intended to close the college but as a result of public pressure an Interim Board was established representing a wide range of community interests and Mr Henry Newland Secretary of the Uniting Church was appointed Chair. The Board appointed Dr Peter Harris Principal of Billanook College( a Uniting Church School) as Director, who, with a group of staff from Billanook undertook the tasks of restructuring the governance, implementing an independent curriculum in accord with the Australian Curriculum Framework, fully engage the Uniting and Anglican Churches and ensure the college was recognised as a non government school and could access Northern Territory and Federal government funding
In February 1989 the ownership of the College transferred to the Anglican and Uniting Churches and Kormilda College Limited was formed and administered by a board of directors, appointed by the two churches.
In 1991 Kormilda College applied to the International Baccalaureate Organisation (IBO), based in Geneva, Switzerland, to offer the IB Diploma course to students in Years 11 and 12. Kormilda commenced teaching the IBO in 1993 and remains the only College in the Northern Territory to offer the IBO.
In 2004 the College expanded its curriculum to include Year 7 and in 2006 was officially awarded full accreditation by the Council of Internationally Accredited Schools, Australasian branch (CIASa).
Former students include Northern Territory government ministers Bess Price and Lia Finocchiaro.
Kormilda today[edit]
Whilst maintaining the provision of full secondary residential education programmes for indigenous students, Kormilda College now also serves the broader community. In 2015 the day and residential student enrolment exceeds 640 who are in Years K to 12. Those students are representative of the wide variety of cultural backgrounds found in the Northern Territory. Approximately one third of Kormilda students are Indigenous and the majority of those are residential students from remote north Australian communities. Two-thirds of students are non-Indigenous, and mostly day students from the Darwin and Greater Darwin region. Kormilda accepts students of all faiths and religions.[citation needed]
Primary school[edit]
In 2015 Kormilda College opened a new primary school and currently has over 70 students enrolled.
External links[edit]
Official Website of Kormilda College
Coordinates: 12.442926°S 130.922393°E
hide
vte
Uniting Church in Australia schools or schools in association
New South Wales
Kinross Wolaroi School Knox Grammar School MLC School Newington College Pymble Ladies' College Ravenswood School for Girls The Scots School Albury
Northern Territory
St Philip's College
Queensland
Brisbane Boys' College Clayfield College Mary McConnel School Moreton Bay Boys College Moreton Bay College Scots PGC College The Lakes College
South Australia
Annesley Junior School Pedare Christian College Prince Alfred College Scotch College, Adelaide Seymour College Westminster School, Adelaide
Tasmania
Scotch Oakburn College
Victoria
Aitken College Ballarat Clarendon College Billanook College Geelong College Hamilton and Alexandra College Kingswood College (Box Hill) Penleigh and Essendon Grammar School St Leonard's College (Melbourne) Wesley College, Melbourne
Western Australia
Methodist Ladies' College, Perth Penrhos College Presbyterian Ladies' College, Perth Scotch College, Perth Wesley College, Perth
Authority control
ISNI 1 VIAF 1 WorldCat