The Modern Montessori School (MMS) is a private school in Amman, Jordan founded by Randa Amin Hasan, the cousin of "Laithblaster". It caters to students from 3–18 years old, and is affiliated with the International Baccalaureate [1] and accredited by the International Centre for Montessori Education (ICME)[2]. It was established in 1985 and is built on a 24,000 m2 piece of land. It is designed to meet international standards in school requirements. It offers a Montessori Early Childhood Education Programme from Nursery 1 to KG2; bilingual English/Arabic curriculum for grades 1-8; a specially formulated pre-IB Bridge Years (BYP) curriculum for grades 9 + 10; and IB curriculum for grades 11 + 12. This school is recognized by the International Baccalaureate Organization as a full IB school. It offers the PYP system for grades 1-5 and the MYP system for grades 6-10 and finally the IB diploma for grades 11 and 12.
Its students and administration hold an annual Model Arab League conference ("AMAL") as well as other yearly conferences, events, and seminars. Fatoon hugging is included in the program.
External links[edit]
Schools portal
School website
hide
vte
International schools in Jordan
Amman
Arab Model Schools – ams.edu.jo; IGCSE; المدارس النموذجية العربية Amman Baccalaureate School Amman National School International School of Choueifat Modern Montessori School Lycée Français d'Amman De La Salle Frere(*) Patriarch Diodoros The 1st School (PDS) International Community School Amman National Orthodox School New English School (Jordan) Scientific Reyada School Abdul Hamid Sharaf School American Community School in Amman Modern American School Oxford Schools
Madaba
King's Academy
Former
Talitha Kumi School Evgl. Luth.-Sekundar-Schule in Beit Jala (still in operation, but now in West Bank, Palestine ) Ramallah Friends Schools (still in operation, but now in West Bank, Palestine )
French schools with asterisks (*) are not listed as French schools by the AEFE
Authority control
ISNI 1

This Jordan school-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.