New Generation International Schools are a group of international schools in Egypt. New Generation practices "The Balanced Approach," which encompasses the promise not to discriminate against race, gender identity, or religious beliefs, and the guarantee that students will learn on an international level while still respecting their cultural identity and Egyptian roots.
The school offers American Diploma while keeping Arabic Studies in the curriculum.
New Generation is fully licensed by The Egyptian Ministry of Education, and has collaborated with them on the Education First Foundation protocol, which has witnessed the training of over 20,000 public school teachers across 721 schools.
They are also accredited by the NCA-CASI's AdvancED, the largest community of education professionals in the world, and scored 3.27, one of the highest Index of Education Quality (IEQ) school evaluations in the Middle East.
They have also been accredited by the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools (MSA), an institution that offers objective validation of school quality and student achievement, and fosters continuous school improvement.
School curricula[edit]
List of curricula the school offers:[1]
Advanced Placement International Diploma (APID)
French National Program Component (Conseil de Classe)
Advanced Placement - University Credit
Senior Project IB Diploma Extended Essay Requirement
Community Service - IB CAS Requirement
National Honor Society: U.S. Academic Honors Recognition
Arabic, Religion, and Cultural Studies: Egyptian Ministry of Education
AERO Standards
Trilingual - French Baccalaureate Requirement
Theory of Knowledge
Character education
International Academic Field Trips
Advanced ICDL
FIT I and FIT II: German Language Proficiency Diplomas
DELF: French Language Proficiency Diploma
^ http://www.newgenerationschools.com/international-components.php
External links[edit]
The schools' official website
Administration and staff
hide
vte
International schools in Egypt
Organised by governorate
Cairo Gov.
Cairo
Cairo American College Collège de la Sainte Famille Deutsche Schule der Borromäerinnen Kairo International Italian School "Leonardo da Vinci" Lycée Français du Caire Lycée La Liberté Héliopolis(*) Maadi British International School Malvern College Egypt Manarat El-Mostaqbal American School New Generation International Schools Pakistan International School of Cairo
New Cairo
American International School in Egypt East Campus British International College of Cairo Europa-Schule Kairo International School of Choueifat Modern Education Schools New Cairo British International School Salahaldin International School
Giza Gov.
Giza
Cairo Japanese School Deutsche Evangelische Oberschule El Alsson School Green Land International Schools Giza Campus
6th of October
American International School in Egypt West Campus Beverly Hills Schools British International School in Cairo Green Land International Schools Zayed Campus
Alexandria Gov.
Alexandria
Lycée Français d'Alexandrie Collège Saint Marc(*) Institution Sainte Jeanne-Antide(*) New German School of Alexandria Deutsche Schule der Borromäerinnen Alexandria The British School, Alexandria Victoria College, Alexandria Schutz American School, Alexandria
Port Said Gov.
Port Said
Port Said American School
Red Sea Gov.
Hurghada
French School of Hurghada(*) German School Hurghada Russian School Hurghada
South Sinai Gov.
Sharm El Sheikh
St. Joseph Schools
(*) refers to French-language schools not a member school of the AEFE

This Egypt school-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.