The New English School, founded in 1969 by Tareq Rajab, is a co-educational British curriculum, English medium, private school in Jabriya, Kuwait, which caters for children between the ages of 3½ and 19. [1]
Contents
1 Standards
2 Facilities
3 Faculty
4 Co-curricular activities
5 Relationship with other schools
6 Notable alumni
7 References
8 External links
Standards[edit]
Students at the New English School follow the assessment, grading and examinations of schools in the United Kingdom. This includes International GCSE, Cambridge University and GCE Advanced Levels . The New English School is a member of the European Council of International Schools (ECIS) and is accredited by British Schools in the Middle East (BSME). In 2011 the school also achieved British School Overseas status, approved by the UK Government Department for Education and monitored by Ofsted (the official body for inspecting schools). (A-Levels), London University, Edexcel.[2]
Facilities[edit]
The school is housed in purpose-built, centrally air-conditioned accommodation for two departments: Secondary and Primary (Junior, Infant and Kindergarten). The Secondary Department consists of 35 classrooms, 11 fully equipped laboratories for physics, chemistry and biology, a number of specialist geography rooms, 4 specialist computer centres, two specialist drama rooms, a specialist music suite, two gymnasiums, various audio-visual resources, a sixth form centre incorporating a study area with networked computers, common room and 2 specialist sixth form teaching rooms, a library containing 20,000 volumes and a Mousetrap Theatre. The Primary Department has 38 classrooms, a library and a specialist music room for each of the Infant and Junior sections and a fully equipped Computer Centre. The school has an all-purpose hall and a fully equipped armchair theatre.
Faculty[edit]
British teachers are recruited from the United Kingdom, Kuwait and other countries.
Co-curricular activities[edit]
Students can choose from over 42 various clubs, of which horse riding, Model UN and ice-skating are some of the most popular. Trips to destinations out of Kuwait are also available, such as the annual Ski Trip to Switzerland in March, as well as trips to Paris. Many clubs are held at various locations outside of the school, such as Paintball, while other clubs include working on The Print (N.E.S Magazine). The School is also involved in ISACK (International Schools Athletic Conference Kuwait), where it has Football, Basketball, Volleyball, Swimming and Table Tennis teams, to name a few.
Relationship with other schools[edit]
Close ties are maintained with the U.K. and with other overseas British and International schools. The school holds memberships in the European Council of International Schools (ECIS) and British Schools in the Middle East (BSME).
Notable alumni[edit]
Rania Al-Yasin, Queen of Jordan since 1999.[3]
King Ali Abdulrahim of the Stone People
Manafius Shabanius, father to a murdered son, husband to a murdered wife.