Norwood International High School (commonly referred to as Norwood International) is a single-campus, co-educational, public high school. The school's campus is located in the Eastern suburbs of Adelaide, South Australia. The school is frequently abbreviated as NIHS.
Founded in 1910 as Norwood Boys School on Osmond Terrace Norwood, it is currently one of the oldest secondary schools in South Australia, though Norwood High School celebrated its centenary in 2010. NMHS has approximately 1400 students enrolled from Years 8 to 12, including 155 international students.[2]
The school had a campus in Rostrevor (Years 8 to 10) which is known as the Middle Campus, and another campus in Magill (Years 11 to 12) known as the Senior Campus, however, both campuses will conjoin as of 2022.
Contents
1 History
1.1 Norwood High School
1.2 Morialta High School
1.3 Norwood Morialta High School
2 Exchange program
3 International Baccalaureate
4 Student life
4.1 Sub-schools and home groups
4.2 Co-curricular activities
5 Sport
5.1 Rowing
5.2 Pedal Prix
6 Performing Arts
6.1 Music
6.2 Musicals
7 Facilities
7.1 New Facilities 2022
8 Notable alumni
8.1 Academia
8.2 Business
8.3 Media, entertainment, and the arts
8.4 Politics and law
8.5 Sport
8.6 Other
9 References
10 External links
History[edit]
Norwood High School[edit]
Norwood High School first opened in 1910 on Osmond Terrace Norwood as Norwood Boys School.[3] In 1915, it moved to new premises at Lossie Street Kensington Park. For a period the school was named Norwood District High School. In 1962, the school moved to what is now the NMHS Senior Campus on The Parade. Norwood High School shared common origins with Norwood Boys Technical School, a school that later became Norwood Boys High, then Marryatville Boys High, and subsequently amalgamated with Kensington and Norwood Girls Technical High to become Marryatville High School,[4] a school that shared a strong rivalry with NHS and continues to with the current NMHS. The school provided an alternative to parents living in the eastern suburbs that wanted to enrol their children in a public school rather than one of the many private, selective and technical schools that were also in the area. During that time Ivan Coward was principal, and he met the needs of those enrolled in the public system who sought entry to the academic world.[5][6]
Morialta High School[edit]
Morialta High School's founding principle was Ian "Joe" Laslett. He was appointed to the position in 1974, in the year before its opening, so was able to liaise closely with the architects during the construction of the school, appoint his staff in preparation for its opening in 1975 and provide opportunities for all who were to be part of the school community to have a say in formulating its philosophies and practices.
Although not due to take up their appointments until 1975, the senior staff met regularly towards the latter part of 1974 and a whole staff conference was held at Graham's Castle conference centre in December of that year.
The school was not ready to open in February 1975 so, for the first weeks the initial 540 students (Years 8 and 9 only) and 45 teachers were housed at Murray House, a grand old building, part of the Murray Park College of Advanced Education (now the Magill Campus of the University of South Australia) until the completion of the main building ("B Block") at Rostrevor. The staff then voted to move into B Block although construction of the other buildings and facilities still continued. The toilet block was not finished, so buses were provided with a timetable to transport students to the nearby McNally Training Centre until the school's facilities were ready.
The buses were also used to provide outdoor education opportunities in the early weeks. These endeavours helped develop a cohesive spirit amongst all members of the school community.
Morialta had an open plan design. "B Block" housed an extensive science teaching area on the ground level and open plan classrooms on levels 2 and 3. Whilst the majority of the eight teaching areas on levels 2 and 3 were designed as Mathematics and Humanities areas, each level had one area also dedicated to Science teaching. The school won awards for its design in the 1970s, as it was considered modern and futuristic for its time.
Morialta was not a specialist High School but had many experienced specialist teachers and ancillary staff. One staff member was senior lab technician Charles Jennings, who worked for 32 years at the school and, later, Norwood Morialta High School, setting up accurate data records and hazardous substances folders for the science area, which helped the school gain level 3 occupational health safety and welfare (OHS&W) accreditation.[7]
Another founding staff member was Deputy Principal, Peter Lang, who later returned as Principal of the amalgamated Norwood and Morialta High Schools.
The early years of the school were packed full of innovative practices and esprit de corps was high. School socials were a regular event and, on 8 December 1975 Australian band Cold Chisel performed at the school.[8]
Following the amalgamation, the Morialta site became the NMHS Middle Campus.
Norwood Morialta High School[edit]
Norwood Morialta High School was formed in 1993 following the amalgamation of Norwood High School and Morialta High School. From 1993 onwards, all students in Years 8 to 10 were based at the Middle Campus, and students in Years 11 to 12 were based at the Senior Campus. The Middle Campus concentrates on developing students from Years 8 to 10 for life at the Senior Campus, which in turn focuses on the senior years of schooling and entrance into higher education. NMHS is the only Government High School in South Australia with two completely separate campuses. Over the past few years, students have sought to enrol at Norwood Morialta High School from outside of the school's zone. Students from Hong Kong, Vietnam, China, Germany, and South America have also been recruited through the school's International Program. Many international students take the opportunity to study their own language at Year 12 level through the School of Languages[9] in addition to the Intensive Secondary English Course (ISEC) established in 2000.[10] Students can begin at the Middle Campus in Years 8 to 10, or at the Senior Campus in Years 11 or 12.[11]
As at Term 3, 2019, Norwood Morialta High School had 1,493.2 full-time equivalent (FTE) students enrolled.[12] Year 12 students of Norwood Morialta High School achieved outstanding results in 2019 as part of their study of the South Australian Certificate of Education, with 100% of students successfully completing their SACE.[13] Of these, one in three (33%) of students achieve results in the A Band and a further 47% achieving in the B band.[13]
Exchange program[edit]
The school has established links with sister schools located internationally in China (Yantai High School, Yantai),[14] Germany (Berufliche Schule des Kreis Segeberg in Norderstedt, Norderstedt), Greece (1st Lykeio Patras, Patras), Japan (Takahashi High School, Okayama),[15] and Italy (Scuola Media Statale Antonio Genovesi, Salerno).[16]
Annual exchanges occur with each of the sister schools, with NMHS sending students to a sister school one year, and hosting students from that school the following year. This gives students the opportunity to experience both the culture and education systems of another country and enhance student learning and communications skills in other languages. There are also opportunities for individual students to go on a long term exchange overseas. The tenth anniversary of the exchange with Japan was celebrated in September 2000.[10]
International Baccalaureate[edit]
Since 1996,[17] NMHS Middle Campus has offered a comprehensive program that meets requirements of both the South Australian Curriculum and Accountability (SACSA) framework and the International Baccalaureate Middle Years Program. It offers Years 3, 4 and 5 of the IBMYP and operates in a cluster of schools in which Years 1 and 2 are offered by three local Primary Schools.
In order to meet MYP requirements, students must choose Language B, Technology and Arts courses in Year 10. All students study courses in English, Health and PE, Mathematics, Science and Society and Environment in each year. In Years 9 and 10, Maths courses are differentiated into Advanced and Standard. Language B (a study of a second language) is compulsory in Years 8, 9, and 10.
In 2020, Norwood Morialta High School was honoured to be selected as one of four Public South Australian High Schools to apply for International Baccalaureate Diploma Program and is now a candidate school.
Student life[edit]
Sub-schools and home groups[edit]
Norwood Morialta High School places its students into one of three Sub-schools, which are similar to houses used at other schools. NMHS has three sub-schools; Blue, Red and Gold. The sub-schools were originally used at Morialta High School and have continued to be used since the amalgamation in 1993. Sub-schools contain Home Groups that have approximately 20 to 30 students each. Students are divided into Sub-Schools for administrative and other purposes. Students from different Sub-Schools display a strong sense of rivalry towards each other during the weeks leading up to Sports Day which is held annually at Santos Stadium.
From 2008, Middle Campus students were placed into Year level sub-schools, with students still identifying with their sporting colours of Blue, Red and Gold for Sports Day.[18] As of 2016, Norwood Morialta High School has replaced the sub-schools with Learning Communities; Hartley, Dunstan and Morialta for the Middle Campus, and Laslett & Campbell for the Senior Campus. The difference is purely in name, and they function the same way that the sub-schools did prior to the change.
Co-curricular activities[edit]
Students have opportunities to partake in academic pursuits as well by participating in a vast range of co-curricular activities.[19]
Community Service can be done through programmes such as the 40 Hour Famine, active8, Glossy Black Cockatoo Project, Peer Support, and the publication of School Yearbook. Students can also participate in broader activities such as Amnesty International, Australian Business Week, Campbelltown Youth Council, UNICEF Ambassadors, Youth Parliament Group, Debating, National Mathematics, Science and Language competitions, School Formal Committee, and the Student Representative Council.
Sport[edit]
Students can participate in sporting activities that the school offers through various associations, such as the Sports Association for Adelaide Schools (SAAS), the Catholic Girls Sports Association, and Secondary School Sport SA.[14]
Sports offered by the school include:
5-A-Side Soccer
Beach Volleyball
Dragon Boat Racing
Indoor Cricket
Knockout Badminton
Knockout Basketball
Knockout Tennis
SASSA Cross Country
SSSSA and Vista Athletics
SSSSA and Vista Swimming
Saturday Netball
Saturday Soccer
School Athletics Carnival
Table Tennis
Touch Football
Vista Football
Students also have the chance to participate in Camping and bushwalking, Rock climbing, canoeing, aquatic skills, orienteering, and distance running.
Rowing[edit]
NMHS is one of three public schools in South Australia to offer Rowing as a summer sport, the other two public schools being Adelaide High School and Unley High School. NMHS competes annually with twelve other schools in the Schools' Head of the River Regatta, held at West Lakes. Training is held on the River Torrens, or at West Lakes where the school's Boathouses are located.[14]
Pedal Prix[edit]
The school participates in Pedal prix. Teams are entered, according to team members' ages, in the Junior Secondary and Senior Secondary Categories to ensure that all year levels are covered. The school has two teams in the Open Category which are mainly for old scholars but students still participate in these teams. NMHS currently[when?] has four teams entered in the Series with students assuming significant team responsibilities including building and maintaining the bike. There is a significant amount of rivalry between the four teams, namely the two open ones Focus and Astro. As a result of this rivalry many Focus team members call the Astro bike "Gastro". The teams are:
Team XP8[14]
Team Protégé[14]
Team Focus[14]
Team Astro[14]
Performing Arts[edit]
Morialta High School was an entrant in the former Rock 'n' Roll Eisteddfod, competing in the years 1986 (Russians), 1987 (Love You Till the Day I Die), 1998 (Break Away) 1989 (Dear Diary), 1990 (Revival) and 1991 becoming the South Australian winner in 1989.[20] After the amalgamation with Norwood High School, Norwood Morialta High School competed in the years 1993, 1995 and 1997, becoming state winners in 1994.[21]
Music[edit]
The school offers a comprehensive music program to all its students. In the past, the school's music students had the opportunity to work with the Adelaide Symphony Orchestra.
A themed music concert is performed annually at the Ivan Coward Hall at the Senior Campus. Previous themes have included The British Invasion which featured music from UK artists such as The Beatles, Rolling Stones, Handel, and Gilbert and Sullivan, and Music from Latin America featuring a performance from music students from nearby feeder school Magill Primary School.[citation needed]
There are various ensembles and bands that music students can participate:
Classical Guitar Ensemble
Flute Ensemble
String Ensemble
Rock Band
School Vocal Ensemble
Senior Vocal Ensemble
String Trio
Year level Bands (8-11)
Jazz band
Small Jazz combo
Musicals[edit]
Norwood Morialta High School performs an annual musical production involving students of all year levels. The musical is run almost entirely by students from stage management, makeup and props to the actors and lighting technicians. It is supported and partially funded by local businesses and the community, in addition to funding from within the school. The school musical is a way for students to interact with people they may have never been able to get to know otherwise. In stage 2, SACE points may be awarded to participants. Past musicals include: The Pirates of Penzance, Les Misérables, Calamity Jane, The Wizard of Oz, Fiddler on the Roof, Annie and Chicago, amongst many others. Their most recent performance was The Sound of Music in 2019.[22]
Facilities[edit]
Though there are separate Middle and Senior campuses, the following list of facilities are available on both:
Art/Design rooms
Automotive garages
Basketball, Netball and Tennis courts
Canteens
Computer rooms
Cricket nets
Design and Technology Studies areas
Dance/Drama studios
Gymnasiums
Home Economics areas
Multimedia rooms
Multiple Ovals (including Soccer Ovals)
Music rooms
Resource Centres
The Music rooms at both campuses have a main room that is used for class tuition and several small soundproof rooms in which each there is a piano available for private individual practice. Facilities unique to the Senior Campus include a large cafeteria, which has one large, and another smaller area, separated by a shared canteen. Above the cafeteria are the linked The Ivan Coward Hall, and The Peter Lang Performing Arts Centre, a facility built in the late 1990s. A specialised room dedicated entirely to filming is also located at the Senior Campus.
New Facilities 2022[edit]
Norwood Morialta High School was pleased to receive $51.95m[23] as part of the Building Better Schools fund to co-locate our two campuses onto The Parade site, accommodating 1700 students across Years 7 to 12. From 2022, Norwood Morialta High School students will have access to:
A new three-storey middle school building with maker spaces, a canteen and roof-top place space.
An extended Innovation Hub with refurbished Technology and Music suites and a new two-story building for Home Economics and Art, Design and Media.
A refurbished gymnasium and expanded sports courts.
A re-developed contemporary Learning Hub and Student Support Centre (former cafeteria space).
A renovated Administration area, staffroom and Wellbeing Hub.
Ten refurbished classrooms, two modern laboratories, collaborative learning spaces and staff preparation area.
New lift and facade entry statement.
Landscaping, outdoor learning spaces and car park.
These new, contemporary facilities will enhance flexibility in the use of spaces and promote world-class learning experiences, whilst maintaining the schools distinct middle and senior schooling principles.
Project construction commenced in Term 3, 2020 and will be delivered in a multi-staged approach to minimise disruption to student learning and engagement.[24] More details regarding this project, including monthly recap videos, can be found on the school's website.
Notable alumni[edit]
This list is incomplete, and includes former students of NMHS, not all of whom graduated from this school.
Academia[edit]
Professor Barbara Pocock, Director of the Centre for Work + Life at the Hawke Research Institute for Sustainable Societies, University of South Australia[25]
Business[edit]
Jim Zavos, Founder of EzyDVD[26]
Media, entertainment, and the arts[edit]
Dame Judith Anderson AC DBE, actress[27][28]
Kate Collins, Adelaide presenter of Nine News[citation needed]
Clive Hale, news and current affairs presenter[29]
Jim Keays, lead singer The Masters Apprentices
Dichen Lachman, actress in Neighbours[30]
Politics and law[edit]
Katie Hodson-Thomas, Former Member for Carine, Western Australian Parliament[31]
Justice John Sulan, South Australian Judge[32]
Stephen Yarwood, Former Lord Mayor of the City of Adelaide in South Australia[33]
Sport[edit]
Nathan Bassett, Adelaide Crows footballer[34]
Neil Craig, former coach of the Adelaide Crows[citation needed]
Orazio Fantasia, Essendon Football Club Footballer[citation needed]
Johan Linde, Olympic super heavyweight boxer and Australian and Oceania super heavyweight champion
Chris Morgan, Olympic and world champion rower.[citation needed]
Joel Patfull, Brisbane Lions footballer[citation needed]
Andrew Schacht, Olympic athlete, Volleyball[35]
Other[edit]
Lionel Matthews, recipient of the George Cross.[36]