The Queensland Academies Creative Industries (QACI) is a selective entry senior state high school in Queensland, Australia which offers the International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme. The school aims to provide a platform for like-minded students wishing to incorporate creative subjects such as dance, film, music, visual arts, design and theatre into their rigorous academic programme. Students are selected through a process of testing, interviews and auditions to ensure that they are suited to the demands of the Academy. It is located within the Kelvin Grove Urban Village. The Queensland Academies - Creative Industries Campus is Queensland’s first vertical school, opened in 2007.
Contents
1 History
2 Principals
3 Facilities
4 Technology
5 Curriculum
6 House system
7 Partnerships
8 See also
9 References
10 External links
History[edit]
The creation of the Queensland Academies was announced by Premier Peter Beattie on 17 April 2005 as part of the Queensland Government's Smart State Strategy - a policy designed to foster knowledge, creativity and innovation within the state.[3] The Creative Industries Campus subsequently opened in 2007 in partnership with the Queensland University of Technology.
Principals[edit]
Founding Principal: John Jose (2007- July 2014)
Previous Acting Principal: Glen Donald (July 2014 – December 2015)
Previous Principal: Gavin Bryce (January 2016 – December 2020)
Previous Principal: Karen Casey (January 2021 – July 2020)
Principal: Gavin Bryce (July 2020 - Present)
Facilities[edit]
QACI is a 7-level high rise school which possesses an industry standard art gallery, film editing studios, a green room, visual art studios, a music recording studio, a dance studio, a black box theatre studio and a 360-seat performance theatre. The whole building is air conditioned. The refectory on level 4 has fridges, microwaves and hot water to accommodate students during lunch as well as two outdoor courtyards and a beanbag lounge. The academy has 4 elevators to assist with traveling around the school as well as a swipe card system to ensure student safety. The academy's Information Research Centre has a range of IB subject specific books. In addition to this, students are also able to have access to the library at the nearby QUT Kelvin Grove campus.
The facilities are available for hire for external use, and have a moderate lamp stock for the venue. The Music recording studio is run by a company named lot 17 studios, and is also available for external hire through the company.
Technology[edit]
All students who enter the school are required to obtain a Macbook for use in their classes, and subsequently, the majority of the work conducted is able to be completed digitally utilising software such as the Adobe Creative Suite. Additionally, classrooms contain interactive whiteboards and the entire campus features wireless internet access. Each classroom is equipped with an Apple TV.
Curriculum[edit]
See also: International Baccalaureate
Students at QACI may exclusively study the International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme (IBDP).[4] Year 10 students at the Academy study an IB preparation program known as Pre-IB. Year 11 and 12 students then undertake the official IBDP. A student may do two Group 6 subjects instead of a science but is required to study Environmental Systems and Societies as their Group 3 subject, or a student may select two Group 4 subjects and no Group 6 subject.
Year 10 students are encouraged to take pre-IB subjects which line-up with their senior IB subjects. Year 10 subjects are not taught at SL/HL, but are rather combined. Year 10 students must take one subject from each of the following groups.
Year 10 Pre-IB Subjects (2021)
Group Available subjects
Group 1 (Studies in Language and Literature - Primary Language) English Language and Literature
Group 2 (Language B - Secondary Language) French (Ab initio/Advanced), Spanish (Ab initio/Advanced), Mandarin (Ab initio.Advanced)
Group 3 (Individuals and Societies) Business Management, Psychology, Global Politics, Science
Group 4 (Sciences) Design Technology, Science, Second Arts Subject
Group 5 (Mathematics) Year 10 Mathematics, Advanced Mathematics
Group 6 (The Arts) Music, Visual Art, Theatre, Film, Dance, Second Science (i.e. DT & Science)
Extra Inner-Core Subjects IBL
In years 11 and 12, students select one subject from each of the groups plus all of the mandatory IB components. At least three subjects must be taken at Higher Level (HL) and the remainder are taken at Standard Level (SL).
Group Available subjects
Group 1 (Studies in Language and Literature - Primary Language) English Language and Literature (SL/HL), School-Supported-Self-Taught Literature (SL Studied Independently)
Group 2 (Language B - Secondary Language) English (SL/HL Studied Independently), French (Ab initio/SL/HL), Spanish (Ab initio/SL/HL), Mandarin (Ab initio/SL/HL), Non-Mainstream Language (SL/HL Studied Independently)
Group 3 (Individuals and Societies) Environmental Systems and Societies (SL), Business and Management (SL/HL), Psychology (SL/HL), Global Politics (SL/HL)
Group 4 (Sciences) Design Technology (SL/HL), Chemistry (SL/HL), Biology (SL/HL), Physics (SL/HL)
Group 5 (Mathematics) Mathematics: Applications and Interpretations (SL), Mathematics: Analysis and Approaches (SL/HL)
Group 6 (The Arts) Music (SL/HL), Visual Art (SL/HL), Theatre (HL), Film (HL), Dance (HL)
Mandatory IB Components Theory of Knowledge (TOK), Creativity, Activity and Service (CAS), Extended Essay (EE)[5]
[6]
House system[edit]
QACI has three houses, each name represents a different cultural or language group thus reflecting QACI's global outlook.
These three houses are:
Éveiller (green) - meaning to awaken in French
Matjin (red) - believed to mean create in an Australian Indigenous language
Vivezza (yellow) - meaning liveliness in Italian.
Partnerships[edit]
The Queensland Academies - Creative Industries seeks to build partnerships with leading artistic leaders and organizations. The theatre and gallery spaces are commonly used by world-renowned artists and performers to exhibit their work, intended to expose students to the potential of their art subject.
See also[edit]
Queensland Academy for Science, Mathematics and Technology
Queensland Academy for Health Sciences
International Baccalaureate Organisation