The Queensland Academies – Science Mathematics & Technology Campus (QASMT) is a selective entry high school in Queensland, Australia, developed in partnership with the University of Queensland. QASMT offers the International Baccalaureate Diploma Program to students in Years 11 and 12, and also offers the International Baccalaureate Middle Years Program to Year 7-10 students. The institution consistently performs above IB world-average, and is the highest performing school in Queensland based on OP1-equivalents and tertiary acceptance rates.[1]
In 2016, Better Education ranked Queensland Academies - Science Mathematics & Technology Campus as the top performing school in the state of Queensland.[2]
Contents
1 History
2 Aims
3 Student entry
4 Uniform
5 Academic results
6 Curriculum
7 Facilities
8 Extra-curricular activities
9 See also
10 References
11 External links
History[edit]
The creation of the Queensland Academies was announced by Premier Peter Beattie on 17 April 2005 as part of the Queensland Government's Smart State Strategy – a policy designed to foster knowledge, creativity and innovation within QLD. The Queensland Academies – Science Mathematics & Technology Campus (QASMT) subsequently opened in January 2007. The school was established in partnership with the University of Queensland with a focus on sciences and mathematics. The site occupied by QASMT was formerly Toowong College; this location was chosen "to capitalise on its close educational and geographic links with the University of Queensland."[3]
The site was originally occupied by the house known as Ormlie and later as Easton Gray and owned by Sir Arthur Hunter Palmer, Premier of Queensland[4] and subsequently the residence of his brother-in-law Hugh Mosman (who discovered gold at Charters Towers).[5] Easton Gray was sold in 1944 for the construction of Toowong State High School, later Toowong College.[6]
The first cohort of students graduated from QASMT in 2008.[citation needed]
Two other academies were created (with close ties to QASMT). In 2007 the Queensland Academy for Creative Industries (QACI) was established in partnership with the Queensland University of Technology with a focus towards media, film, design and technology, music, theatre arts and visual arts. In 2008, the Queensland Academy for Health Sciences (QAHS) was developed in partnership with Griffith University with a focus towards medicine, dentistry, physiotherapy, optometry and medical research.[citation needed]
In 2019, QASMT introduced its Middle School Program, with its new Grade 7 cohort. In 2021, QASMT became a fully complete 7-12 school. To cater for the new students, QASMT was expanded in a 2-stage approach.[citation needed]
Stage 1 was completed in January 2019 to accommodate the first cohort of Year 7 students. Stage 1 included the refurbishment of existing buildings and the installation of prefabricated accommodation while stage 2 was being delivered.[citation needed]
Stage 2 delivered new educational infrastructure and facilities to cater for the Years 8 and 9 students at the school. Stage 2 works commenced in February 2019 and includes the delivery of a new Northern Learning Centre and a new Eastern Science Technology Engineering & Mathematics (STEM) hub.
The construction of the new Eastern Science Technology Engineering & Mathematics was completed in December 2019 and is currently in use. The remaining Stage 2 building works, including the Northern Learning Centre, were completed in mid-2020.
Principals:
Stephen Loggie (2007–2009)
Kath Kayrooz (2010–2013)
Judy Neilson (2014)
Kath Kayrooz (2015–present)
Aims[edit]
QASMT was advertised as a school for "Queensland's best and brightest" students.[7] It was initially designed as a school where the most academically minded Year 10, 11 and 12 students in the state could conglomerate in a university-like environment.
Student entry[edit]
Student entry to QASMT is via a multi-stage selection process.[8] Following application, students sit a general academic test designed by eduTest. This exam is presented to students in several parts: an English comprehension exam, an English writing exam, a mathematics, verbal and non-verbal reasoning. The entrance for Year 7 can be written in Year 5 and 6 while a harder test is given in Year 8 and 9 to successfully enter for Year 10 (starting 2021, tests are only able to be taken in 5-6 as the school completes its middle school expansion). Successful students who reach the specified benchmark in all exams then progress to an interview with Education Queensland and QASMT's staff. The interview panel assess each candidates' suitability to the Academy's learning environment and their ability to contribute to the Academy community. Three main criteria are assessed: motivation and like-mindedness; personal capabilities and knowledge of the Academy; and work ethic and past reports. Students who are successful in the interview receive a formal invitation to attend the Academy.
Several means of financial assistance are offered to students. The Queensland Academies Isolated Students (QAIS) Bursary is offered to rural and remote students who meet certain criteria. In addition, a maximum of three scholarships (for all three years of enrolment), which cover IB costs and resource fees, are offered to Year 10 students each year.
Uniform[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The school uniform is a source of great pride at QASMT. The colours of white, charcoal, red and navy are incorporated into both the boys and girls' uniforms.
The male formal uniform consists of charcoal grey long trousers, a white shirt with the new school emblem, and a charcoal grey tie with thin red and white stripes, and the old school emblem.
The girl's formal uniform consists of a knee-length charcoal skirt, a white blouse with the school's crest and a striped charcoal, red and navy scarf knotted around the collar.
During the Winter months of term 2 and 3, all students are required to wear a blazer to and from school. Junior years (7, 8 and 9) have a red blazer, and senior years (10, 11 and 12) have a black blazer, both consisting of all badges the student has achieved, and the school emblem on the pocket. They are not required during Summer - terms 1 and 4
An "active wear" uniform consisting of a white sports t-shirt and either red shorts for juniors or navy shorts for seniors are worn once a week.
Academic results[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
In 2020:
2 students received perfect IB score of 45
6 students received an IB score of 44
43 students achieved an IB score of 40+
157 students achieved an 90+ Atar equivalent
Curriculum[edit]
Students in Years 7-9 at QASMT study the International Baccalaureate Middle Years Program.[9] Following this, Year 10 students study a Pre-IB course designed to prepare them for taking the diploma, where they 'sample' each of the subjects offered in order to make an informed decision when they come to choose their subjects after the first semester of Year 10. In Years 11-12, the International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme is undertaken. The subjects offered at the Academy follow the International Baccalaureate's guidelines, where students are required to select a subject from each of the IB's 6 specified groups, where at least three subjects must be taken at Higher Level (HL), whilst the remainder are taken at Standard Level (SL). If a student does not wish to study a Group 6 (Arts) subject, they may instead take a second subject from Group 4 (Experimental Sciences).[10] In addition, students must complete the compulsory IB inner core, which consists of Creativity, Activity and Service (CAS), Theory of Knowledge (TOK) and Extended Essay (EE).[10]
In Years 11-12, the following subjects may be selected:[10]
Group Available Subjects
Group 1 (Studies in Language and Literature - Primary Language) English Language and Literature (SL/HL), School-Supported Self-Taught Literature (SL)
Group 2 (Language B - Secondary Language) French Ab Initio (SL), Spanish Ab Initio (SL), Japanese Ab Initio (SL), German Ab Initio (SL)
Group 3 (Individuals and Societies) Business Management (HL), Economics (HL), Information Technology in a Global Society (HL), Psychology (HL)
Group 4 (Experimental Sciences) Biology (SL/HL), Chemistry (SL/HL), Physics (SL/HL), Sports Exercise and Health Science (HL), Computer Science (HL)
Group 5 (Mathematics) Mathematics Applications and Interpretations (SL/HL), Mathematics Analysis and Approaches (SL/HL)
Group 6 (The Arts) or a Second Group 4 Subject Visual Art (HL)
Facilities[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
STEM Building
University-standard science laboratories
Wireless campus
Modern gymnasium
Refectory
300 seat lecture theatre
Music facilities
Observatory
Extra-curricular activities[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
QASMT offers a variety of activities that are run through the school or externally.
Sporting (for a maximum of one hour per week unless representing the school in other various inter-school competitions throughout the year) :
Cricket (Metropolitan West Champions 2019)
Soccer
Tennis
Table tennis
Basketball
Ultimate disk
Lawn bowls
Gym
Touch Football
Rowing
Volunteer and Community Work:
LEOs Club
Social Media for the Elderly
Competitions:
United Nations Youth Summits and Competitions
RoboCup Junior
FIRST LEGO League
FIRST Tech Challenge
Optiminds
Brain Bee Challenge
Future Problem Solvers
OzClo
Bring It On
Creative:
String orchestra
Contemporary orchestra
Jazz band
Talent quests
Creative generations
School Musical
Choir
Music Camp
Art Show Case
Other:
Electronics tutorials
Robotics
High Performance Computing Club
Science Ambassadors
IT Mentors
Lectures run through the University of Queensland and Queensland University of Technology
Involvement in several other universities (Griffith University, QIMR, etc.)[citation needed]
Astronomy
Chess
Most of these activities contribute towards IB CAS requirements.
See also[edit]
International Baccalaureate Organisation
Queensland Academy for Creative Industries
Queensland Academy for Health Sciences