For other places with the same name, see Sacred Heart College (disambiguation).
Sacred Heart College is a Roman Catholic secondary school for girls, and is located in Retreat Road, Newtown, Geelong, Victoria in Australia. It is now one of the largest Catholic secondary girls schools in Victoria.[1]
The current principal is Anna Negro, with three Deputy Principals: Gerard Raven, Tanya Malley and Acting Deputy Principal, Catherine Gulli.
Contents
1 History
2 Alumni Association
3 Curriculum
4 See also
5 References
History[edit]
In June 1859, the Archbishop of Melbourne, James Alipius Goold, petitioned the Sisters of Mercy in Dublin to establish a community in Geelong. Mother Mary Xavier Maguire, Mary Gabrielle Sherlock, Margaret Mullally, Joseph Manly, Rose Lynch and Novice Aloysius Ryan arrived on 3 December 1859.[2] The sisters immediately set about providing Catholic education for all who desired it. The boarding school and day school that is now Sacred Heart College was opened for the beginning of the next school year (1860) with 12 pupils, 6 of whom were boarders. In 1861 an adjoining orphanage was opened and very soon there were 50 girls being cared for. The Sisters also staffed local parish primary schools in the area and after school hours were seen visiting the sick and aged in their homes and the hospital. Within a few years, a large convent including a chapel as well as school buildings such as classrooms and dormitories had been built. By the turn of the century the college was registered as "conducting" a junior school (kindergarten and primary) as well as a senior and boarding school.[3][4]
Alumni Association[edit]
In 1924, a Past Pupils' Association was formed and this became predecessor of the Old Collegians' Association established in 1932.[5] As well as the Geelong-based committee, a Melbourne Group was formed in the 1930s and in 1981 a Western District Group was set up to bring together former students from that area, many of whom had been boarders.
The association is now known as the Alumni Association. Today, each student automatically becomes a member of the Alumni Association upon her graduation from the College.
Curriculum[edit]
The College offers subjects in the following areas:
Humanities
English
LOTE - Italian, French and Japanese
The Arts - Including theatre studies, music and visual art
Religious Education
Mathematics and science
Technology
Health and Physical Education
Some classes are also offered at nearby school St Joseph's College at VCE level, including Chinese.
Sacred Heart College the Victorian Certificate of Education, and has introduced the International Baccalaureate for middle years students.[6] Year Eleven and Twelve pupils may also choose to undertake a Vocational Education and Training or Victorian Certificate of Applied Learning program.
See also[edit]
Sacred Heart College (disambiguation)
Sacred Heart
Sisters of Mercy
Geelong