Saint Paul American School
Simplified Chinese 北京圣保罗美国学校
Traditional Chinese 北京聖保羅美國學校
show
Transcriptions
Saint Paul American School Beijing (SPAS; Chinese: 北京圣保罗美国学校) is a private English-language boarding school (de facto education program and part of the Second High School Attached to Beijing Normal University, or SHSBNU) in Haidian District, Beijing, aimed at grades 7-12 students from the expatriate community of Beijing, and international exchange students.
St. Paul American School is part of the Nacel International School System, with sister schools in Saint Paul, Minnesota, United States, Korea, Philippines, and France. Students receive US curriculum instruction in English leading to a diploma from Saint Paul American School (Nacel International School System), and will be provided with courses in Chinese language, culture and history offered in collaboration with SHSBNU. The dual diploma offers students an opportunity to take advantage of learning in the American school system and explore Chinese language, culture, and history. Scholarships are available.
Contents
1 Academics
2 Staff and student body
3 Facilities
4 Academic year and day
5 See also
6 Student publications
7 External links
Academics[edit]
Saint Paul American School offers a variety of courses designed for each grade and English level. Independent studies are available with a pre-approved written plan, teacher, and principal approval. All students are placed in their classes according to their grade and English ability.
Mathematics: Pre-Algebra, Algebra, Geometry, Algebra 2, Pre-Calculus, and (AP) Calculus
Social studies: Middle School Social Studies, American Government, Geography, US History, World History, Economics, Social Issues, Current Events
Science: General Science, Physical Science, Biology, Anatomy, Environmental Science, (AP)Chemistry, (AP) Physics
Language arts: English Composition, Academic Writing, Communication Skills, Speech, American Literature, World Literature, Creative Writing
Electives: Information Technology (IT), Digital Art, Web Development, Art, Music, Drama, Beginning Band, Symphonic Band, Health, Physical Education, College Preparation
Chinese classes: Chinese 1, Chinese 2, Chinese 3, Chinese 4, Chinese 5, Chinese 6, HSK 3, HSK 4, HSK 5, HSK 6, AP Chinese
Test preparation: Intensive English I, Intensive English II, TOEFL Preparation, SAT Preparation

The program has registered for a separate CEEB School Code from that shared by the SHSBNU Gaokao campus and Project Global Access, another program in the international division. This allows for an American curriculum to be presented to college representatives, and provides SPAS students an advantage in college application.
Staff and student body[edit]
The program has 22 international teachers, 12 Chinese teachers, an American principal, and English speaking office/dormitory staff members. Currently, it hosts about 300 students from nearly 20 different countries and regions, including the Australia, Brazil, Central African Republic - CAR, China, Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Germany, Hong Kong SAR, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Lithuania, Mexico, Nigeria, Russia, Slovakia, South Korea, Tajikistan, Thailand, Uzbekistan and the United States.
Facilities[edit]
SPAS belongs to the Qinghe campus of the Second High School Attached to Beijing Normal University (SHSBNU). This campus, located just to the north of Beijing Olympic Forest Park, is home to several boarding school programs (collectively the International Division of SHSBNU, including SPAS) and a public middle school program. Facilities on campus include two dormitory buildings, library, laboratories, computer and technology center, full-sized gym, a Chinese and an international cafeteria and more. An outdoor multi-purpose court with a running track, basketball courts, and soccer field is accessible to students.
Academic year and day[edit]
The SPAS academic year consists of two semesters with a vacations schedule that is a hybrid of the American and Chinese calendar. The first semester starts in late August and ends in January with a Christmas break in December. The second semester starts after Chinese New Year in February and runs until June.
SPAS does not celebrate several traditional Chinese festivals, but holds annual Halloween parties and proms. Students also have the exclusive opportunity to engage in events including "Spirit Weeks", monthly outdoor activities known as "CAPS trips", and annual Autumn and Spring Trips to Inner Mongolia, Hangzhou, or Shanghai.
The program also engages in campus-wide activities including Sports Day, usually held at the end of September, and College Fairs in autumn and spring.
See also[edit]
Saint Paul American School
Second High School Attached to Beijing Normal University
St. Paul American School - Clark
Student publications[edit]
Students at Saint Paul American School self-publish an annual Yearbook and a student-run Newsletter. Additionally, the school website features some of the best student work on its student work page [1], including student art work [2], student speeches [3], student created websites [4] and student performances [5].
External links[edit]
School website- English
School website- Chinese
show
vte
Haidian District


show
vte
International schools in Beijing


show
vte
American international schools in the People's Republic of China