St Leonard's College is an independent co-educational school in Melbourne, Australia. Located in Brighton East, the school caters for students in all year levels from ELC for three-year-olds to Year 12.
Contents
1 Curriculum
2 Location
3 Facilities
4 Technology
5 Hart Theatre Company
6 Music
7 Sport
7.1 ACS premierships
8 Social responsibility
9 Outdoor education
10 Talent development
11 Notable alumni
12 See also
13 References
14 External links
Curriculum[edit]
St Leonard's was the first school in Victoria, and second in Australia, to offer the International Baccalaureate in addition to the more widely used Victorian Certificate of Education. The school is also authorised to offer the International Baccalaureate Primary Years Programme in the Junior School from ELC to Year 4. The ELC also uses the Reggio Emilia approach to learning.
Location[edit]
St Leonard's College is located in Brighton East, Melbourne, Australia. The school is in close proximity to Port Phillip Bay and 11 kilometres south east of the Central Business District.
Facilities[edit]
Facilities include a performing arts centre, systems engineering centre, theatre, Visual Arts Centre, music centre, Junior, Years 5 and 6, Middle and Senior School buildings, Junior School STEM laboratory, two libraries, modern sports centre with heated indoor swimming centre, gymnasium, dance and aerobics studio, basketball and netball courts, playing fields and multipurpose sports courts.
Technology[edit]
St Leonard's College has a "bring your own device" (BYOD) technology program.[2] Students in the middle years bring their own iPad to school every day while students in the senior years are able to bring any device of their choosing as long as it meets some very general specifications.
In tandem with the BYOD program, the school runs a comprehensive online content management system, named STL Link, to provide its student, teacher and parent community with a wide range of learning and co-curriculum resources. STL Link includes classroom learning resources, assessment material, cocurriculum resources, subscribable calendars, student timetables, student reports, class blogs and staff contact information.
Students in the middle years also use interactive electronic textbooks and an electronic diary system which enables teachers to push homework into their students diaries. They also maintain their own online electronic work portfolios.
While the BYOD program enables most students to complete all of their digital learning, the school also have computers where required. Students studying Information Technology, Media and Visual Design do so using the school owned computers and software.
St Leonard's College is widely recognised in educational circles as a centre of excellence in eLearning and is regularly visited by other schools to learn from their success.[3]
Hart Theatre Company[edit]
In 2012, St Leonard's College launched the Hart Theatre Company, named after long-time drama teacher Roma Hart. The college hosts five productions a year: a year 5/6 musical, Middle School play, Middle School musical, Senior School play and Senior School musical. Recent productions have included Hairspray, Peter Pan, Romeo & Juliet, Mulan, The Wizard of Oz, Annie, Oliver!, The Ruling Class, Invisible Friends, Barnum, Amadeus, Thoroughly Modern Millie, Bugsy Malone, Wind in the Willows, Sweet Charity and Beauty and the Beast.
Hart Theatre productions have consistently been received with critical acclaim, with the company and individual performers and directors receiving nominations and awards from the Music Theatre Guild of Victoria. The 2012 production of Barnum was awarded Junior Production of the Year and Direction of a Junior Production and was also nominated for Musical Direction of a Junior Production, Junior Male Performer in a Leading Role and Junior Female Performer in a Leading Role.[4]
In 2013 the Hart Theatre Company made history by winning Junior Production of the Year for a second year straight, this time for its production of Sweet Charity. The production was also awarded Junior Female Performer in a Leading Role and was nominated for Direction of a Junior Production, Musical Direction of a Junior Production, Junior Male Performer in a Leading Role and Junior Female Performer in a Supporting Role. In the same year the Middle School production of Beauty and the Beast was awarded Junior Male Performer in a Supporting Role and was nominated for Musical Direction of a Junior Production.[5]
Elsewhere in the performing arts, other performances relating to private drama and VCE/IB examinations are held. Students also have the opportunity take private speech and drama lessons and complete AMEB speech and dramas exams.
Music[edit]
A highlight of the music calendar is the House Music Competition, an event held annually for students in years 5 to 12. Held at The Plenary, each house presents two massed choir pieces, a small vocal piece and a small instrumental piece. Specialist judges from other schools are invited to select a winner in each category and overall.
There is a multitude of other opportunities for students to be involved in music education and performance. The college has a full symphonic orchestra, as well as a range of other ensembles.
As well as involvement at college events and assemblies, St Leonard's students have many opportunities to perform as part of music tours and competitions. Each year, St Leonard's College students perform at Generations in Jazz at Mt Gambier, a competition for school ensembles from around the country. Students also have the opportunity to participate in music tours to Europe, the United States and Japan.
Sport[edit]
In years 5 and 6, St Leonard's students participate in the Coeducational Independent Primary Schools Sports Association competition, competing in a range of team sports against other coeducational independent primary schools.
Although the sport program at St Leonard's is not seen as a priority for the college administration, nor is St Leonard's well known for its sporting prowess, students are mandated to join a sporting team up until year 11. The college is part of the Association of Coeducational Schools (ACS) sport competition which involves other independent co-educational schools around Melbourne. All students from years 7 to 11 are involved in the ACS and it is optional for Year 12 students. Students participate in a range of team sports, through the summer and winter seasons, as well as the carnival sports of cross country, swimming and athletics.
St Leonard's College also has a community sport program, providing a number of opportunities for students, parents, staff and alumni to be involved in sport and fitness activities. Yoga, aerobics, gymnastics, adventure racing, surf ski paddling, cheer sports and triathlon are some of the activities available. There are also community basketball and netball clubs and a touch football group.
In 2014 the sailing team won the Victorian Schools Team Sailing Championships for the seventh time,[6] and also regularly competes at the National Championships.
The Hawkes Sport Centre has a large indoor pool, tennis courts, aerobics room, gym, multi-purpose hall and change rooms. The college also has outdoor hard courts and an oval.
ACS premierships[edit]
St Leonard's has won the following ACS premierships.[7]
Combined:
Beach Volleyball (4) - 2014, 2015, 2016, 2019
Touch Football (6) - 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018
Boys:
Basketball (6) - 2001, 2004, 2009, 2014, 2015, 2016
Cricket (3) - 2012, 2014, 2016
Football - 2016
Hockey (2) - 1998, 2020
Soccer (3) - 2003, 2009, 2014
Softball - 2020
Tennis (2) - 2006, 2019
Girls:
Basketball (3) - 2004, 2011, 2012
Football - 2019
Netball (11) - 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2010, 2011, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018
Soccer (4) - 2004, 2013, 2019, 2020
Softball (5) - 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2019
Tennis - 2015
Volleyball (6) - 1998, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2004, 2020
Social responsibility[edit]
The St Leonard's College community is also involved in a range of social justice activities. The College aims to support children and education in local, national and international settings.
Since 1992, St Leonard's College has been involved in Bangladesh, funding and building three schools. Each year, senior students organise a Bangladesh Dinner to raise funds for the ongoing operational expenses of these schools. The college also supports schools in Timor Leste and Nepal.
All year 9 students complete local service activities as part their experiential learning program – CUE (Community, Urban, Environment). The CUE program culminates in Big Experience trips, in which year 9 students take part in an international journey to a country in South East Asia. These trips have a strong emphasis on global sustainability and community service.
St Leonard's students are also involved in fundraising for a range of charities and awareness programs, for example Shave for a Cure, Relay for Life, Amnesty International and Uniting Church social justice programs and camps.
Outdoor education[edit]
Outdoor education is compulsory for students in years 3 to 10. Students attend year level camps at the college's dedicated campsite, Camp Ibis, located on the Gippsland Lakes where they take part in a range of adventure activities including sailing, mountain biking and canoeing.
There is also a voluntary Outdoor Education Extension Program. Students can elect to take part in adventure camps, white water rafting, adventure racing, snowsports (primary to year 12) and hikes (years 10 – 12). In 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2016 the St Leonard's College adventure racing team won the national Hillary Challenge,[8] an interschool competition which tests basic outdoor skills and competencies.
Talent development[edit]
St Leonard's College has a dedicated Talent Development Coordinator who runs an extensive program allowing highly able students to participate in activities including Future Problem Solving, da Vinci Decathlon, Tournament of Minds and Spellmasters. Selected Middle School students also participate in the Metta Program which provides academic challenge and extension in English, maths and science, and allows like-minded students to meet in order to exchange ideas, investigate and problem solve.
Notable alumni[edit]
Kerry Armstrong – actor[9]
Hamish Blake – comedian, radio presenter
Kaarin Fairfax - actor, director and singer
Beverly Jane Fry – international ballet dancer
Noni Hazlehurst AO – actor
Stephanie Hickey - Olympian, Australian snowboard slalom and snowboard cross competitor
Geoff Ogilvy – golfer, winner of the 2006 US Open
Ryan Shelton – comedian
Mark Turnbull – sailor, gold medal winner at the Sydney 2000 Olympic Games
Chris Judd - AFL player
See also[edit]
List of schools in Victoria
International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme