St Paul's Grammar School is an independent non-denominational Christian co-educational early learning, primary and secondary day school, located in Cranebrook, an outer western suburb of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. Established in 1983, St Paul's Grammar School has approximately 860 students, from early learning through Kindergarten to Year 12.
The school is a member of the Independent Schools Association,[1] the Australian Heads of Independent Schools Association,[2] and HICES.
Contents
1 Curriculum
2 Facilities
3 Co-curricular
4 Sports
5 Notable alumni
6 See also
7 References
8 External links
Curriculum[edit]
The school offers the NSW Education Standards Authority (NESA) courses from Kindergarten to Year 12. In addition to NESA courses, the school offers the International Baccalaureate educational programme from Kindergarten to Year 12. In the Junior and Middle Schools, the IB Programmes are integrated with the NSW Board of Studies courses. The IB Primary Years Programme (PYP) is taught in conjunction with the Board of Studies curriculum to approximately 300 students from pre-Kindergarten to Year 6. The IB Middle Years Programme (MYP) is taught in conjunction with NESA curriculum to approximately 300 students from Year 7 to Year 10. Students graduating from Year 10 achieve the International Baccalaureate IB Middle Years Programme Certificate; students also received the former Board of Studies School Certificate before it was scrapped in 2011.
In Years 11 and 12, students can either undertake the IB Diploma Programme or the NESA Higher School Certificate. It has foreign language course options such as Latin, French, Chinese and Spanish.
Facilities[edit]
The school's sporting facilities include an athletics oval, several smaller sports fields, 5 outdoor tennis courts, 4 soccer fields, 1 cricket pitch, 4 outdoor basketball courts and an archery field.
The school has a sports centre with two indoor basketball courts and a small amount of spectator seating above them. This building is also used for major school functions with room for seating for 2,500 people. It also has a Science Block, a Technology Block and a Performing Arts block, in addition to regular classrooms.
Co-curricular[edit]
Co-curricular activities offered by the school include music groups, dance classes, the Duke of Edinburgh Award scheme, chess and Bible study groups, and a NSW Rural Fire Service Cadets program.[3]
Sports[edit]
Sports offered by the school include: athletics (track and field – carnivals), cross country running, basketball, cricket, indoor soccer, netball, soccer, tennis, and touch football. Equestrian events are also offered to students, including dressage, eventing and show jumping.
Notable alumni[edit]
This article's list of alumni may not follow Wikipedia's verifiability policy. Please improve this article by removing names that do not have independent reliable sources showing they merit inclusion in this article AND are alumni, or by incorporating the relevant publications into the body of the article through appropriate citations. (May 2019)
Pat Cummins, Australian test cricketer
Firass Dirani, actor
Paige Leonhardt, swimmer
Matilda McDonell, Australian netball player
Fiona Scott, politician, former Member for the Lindsay
Brittanie Shipway, singer and The Voice Australia contestant
See also[edit]
Schools portal
Christianity portal
List of non-government schools in New South Wales
Nondenominational Christianity