Trinity Lutheran College is an independent, Christian co-educational, preparatory early learning, junior, middle and senior years' college in Ashmore, Gold Coast, Australia.
Contents
1 History
2 School structure
2.1 Campuses
2.2 Facilities and grounds
3 School events
3.1 Arts
3.2 Outdoor education
3.3 Public events
4 Pathways
4.1 OP
4.2 Vocational education
4.3 International Baccalaureate
5 Notable alumni
6 References
7 External links
History[edit]
In January 1981 Trinity Lutheran Primary School opened its doors for the first time by Eddie and Lila MacKenzie, Ben Stephan, Jack and Irene Strohmeyer. The school began with 75 students, with the first classes in the Trinity Lutheran Church Hall, Southport.
School structure[edit]
Campuses[edit]
Trinity Lutheran College is one college, divided into three schools on two campuses. The Early Learning and Junior Years' campus is located around the corner from the main Ashmore Road Trinity Campus. The Junior Years' campus runs from Prep to Year 5. The Middle Years campus is from Year 6 to Year 9, and the Senior Years campus is from Year 10 to 12.
Facilities and grounds[edit]
Major facilities include a 700-seat Chapel/auditorium and a 150-seat Cultural Precinct. In recent years a purpose-built Middle School has been constructed, and the Junior Years' classrooms have undergone a major redevelopment. Trinity has more than 500 computers located across the college for staff and students to use. All classrooms are air-conditioned. In 2007 much of the Senior Years' facilities underwent a 'facelift' with the installation of new furniture and carpet in many of the rooms. Trinity has its own onsite restaurant which is used for various functions throughout the year. The college has recently had two new buildings completed. A Multi-purpose Hall and Sports Centre and a Design Technology and Trade Training Centre.[1]
School events[edit]
Arts[edit]
A twilight concert is held every term. As well as an annual Battle of the Bands competition in February, between the three competing houses. Trinity's productions are on a 4-year rotation, Year A – Musical Production, Year B – International Tour, Year C – Major Production (Large Scale Play for Actors), Year D – National Tour. They hold an Annual Christmas service.
Outdoor education[edit]
All students participate in a multitude of sports including (but not limited to) swimming, triathlon, water polo, cross country, and athletics carnivals.
All grades excluding Year 11 and 12 experience an annual camp.
There is also Musical camp for when the College is producing a musical. There is Band camp for those students whom choose to join a band.
Public events[edit]
The annual College Fete is held on the first Saturday of August.
Pathways[edit]
OP[edit]
Trinity offers the OP tertiary entrance rank system. This pathway returns an OP out of 1–25 based on grades in Year 12 and a QCS Test.
Vocational education[edit]
Vocational Education – certificate courses, school based traineeships and apprenticeships.
International Baccalaureate[edit]
Trinity is one of a few International Baccalaureate IB World Schools on the Gold Coast. The Junior Years' campus (Prep to Year 5) program uses the International Baccalaureate Primary Years Program.[2]
Notable alumni[edit]
This article's list of alumni may not follow Wikipedia's verifiability policy. Please improve this article by removing names that do not have independent reliable sources showing they merit inclusion in this article AND are alumni, or by incorporating the relevant publications into the body of the article through appropriate citations. (November 2019)
Vasos Alexandrou – acoustic engineer, Vipac
Maggie Naouri – actress
Rhys Thomas – neurosurgeon
Kelsey Wakefield – Olympic athlete, Australian Women's Water Polo Team
Hayden Whitworth – founder and CEO, Christian Media
Eduard Wittig – managing director at Goldman Sachs
John Zakos – technology entrepreneur and Greek-Australian businessman