Tsinghua International School (THIS, Chinese: 清华大学附属中学国际部) is a non-profit[citation needed], WASC-accredited international school in Beijing, that was founded in 2009. THIS is attached to one of Beijing's top public secondary schools, Tsinghua Fuzhong. Tsinghua Fuzhong is the secondary school affiliated to Tsinghua University. THIS is tied to and shares some facilities with Tsinghua Fuzhong but remains an independent school. The school has around 430 students in grades 1-12. THIS is in the Advanced Placement program and its courses are derived from the Common Core State Standards Initiative. The colleges attended by alumni are impressive for a small school, including names like Columbia University, Brown University and MIT.
Contents
1 Facilities
2 High school program
2.1 Selection for high school courses
3 Student life
3.1 Extracurricular activities
3.2 Dining service
3.3 Transportation service
4 References
Facilities[edit]
THIS has an elementary school, middle school, and high school. They recently finished the construction of their teaching building with modern classrooms and science labs. In addition, the school just finished construction of an indoor gym. Other facilities include:
Library
Science laboratories
Cafeteria
Athletics track
Basketball courts
Soccer field
Computer labs
Soundproof music studio
Drama studio
Black Box Theatre
Teachers' lounge
Computer lab
New Multi-story Gym
High school program[edit]
The US-based high school curriculum prepares students for colleges in the United States, Canada, and other western countries. Multiple advanced placement courses such as AP World History, AP English Language and Composition, and AP Physics are available, while new courses are being introduced in the future.[1]
Selection for high school courses[edit]
English/Language Arts
Chinese
Social Studies
Visual Arts and Performing Arts
Foreign Languages and Linguistics
Mathematics
Physical Sciences
Computer Technology
Physical Education and Health
Student life[edit]
Extracurricular activities[edit]
THIS teachers provide a variety of after-school extracurricular activities[2] for all elementary school, middle school, and high school students. Activities, including sports, are held every day from 3:30 to 5:30.
THIS is a member of ISAC (International Schools Athletic Conference) and has recently also joined ACAMIS (Association of China and Mongolia International Schools). Middle school and high school extracurricular activities include:
Dance Club
Rock/Pop band
Choir Club
Community Service Club
Speech and Debate Club
MUN (Model United Nations)
MEAT Club (Middle School Events & Activities Team)
Engineering Club
Woodworking Club
SciNex (Science Club)
Middle School Math Club
High School Math Club
Author's Circle
Traditional Dance Club
Fashion Design Club
Theatre
English Newspaper, The Spartan Times
Chinese Newspaper
Korean Club
Japanese Club
Visual Art Club
Dining service[edit]
The catering services[3] at THIS provide breakfast, lunch, and dinner for middle school students, high school students, and faculty members. They serve a variety of dishes that are reasonably priced. Some dishes include noodles, Japanese tofu, and stir-fried rice.
Elementary students have lunch prepared for them beforehand and are given morning snacks every day.
Transportation service[edit]
Daily school buses[4] at designated pick-up points before and after school are provided for elementary school, middle school, and high school students. THIS has eleven bus routes for students to choose from across Beijing.