Yew Chung International School of Beijing (YCIS Beijing, simplified Chinese: 北京耀中国际学校; traditional Chinese: 北京耀中國際學校; pinyin: Běijīng Yàozhōng Guójì Xuéxiào) is an accredited K2-Year 13 co-educational international school in Chaoyang District, Beijing.[1]
Contents
1 Origins and history
2 Timeline
3 Curriculum
4 House system
4.1 The houses are;
5 Accreditation
6 Facilities
7 International school charity
8 Awards
9 Further reading
10 References
11 Network of schools
12 External links
Origins and history[edit]
The Yew Chung International School of Beijing is an accredited International School located in  downtown Beijing adjacent the Honglingjin Park. It offers education to expatriate children aged 2 to 18 years old (K2 to Year 13, offering early childhood education or kindergarten, primary school education, and secondary school education (IGCSE and IBDP). YCIS Beijing values and embraces eastern and western cultures, with a specific focus on collaboration, which has resulted in the inception of Learning Communities, also facilitates YCIS’ unique Co-Teaching Model. The international school is part of a network of schools under the Yew Chung Education Foundation which includes campuses in Shanghai, Qingdao, Chongqing, Hong Kong, and Silicon Valley, United States.
Timeline[edit]
1995 – YCIS Beijing is founded.
1997 – YCIS Beijing adopts its Co-Teaching Model.
2001 – The In-School Individual Instrumental Programme (IIIP) is introduced and YCIS Beijing becomes an exam centre for the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music.
2003 – YCIS Beijing celebrates its first International Day and the new Secondary School library and computer labs are opened.
2006 – The school begins offering University Guidance and Student Counselling services and employs a Primary Curriculum Co-ordinator. Both the IBDP and IGCSE programmes are formally implemented.
2008 – YCIS Beijing raises relief donations for victims of the Sichuan earthquake, sparking the beginnings of the Seeds of Hope project.
2009 – YCIS Beijing is formally accredited by three separate academic accreditation organizations.
2015 – YCIS Beijing celebrates its 20th anniversary.
2019 – YCIS Beijing celebrates the 87th anniversary of the founding of the Yew Chung Education Foundation.
2020 – YCIS Beijing Celebrates its 25th anniversary.
Curriculum[edit]
Yew Chung International School of Beijing follows the National Curriculum for England combined with a Chinese language and culture programme (Mandarin).
House system[edit]
YCIS Beijing has a house system which consists of four school houses. Every student from primary to secondary belongs to a house and stands to win points for their house throughout the year in a series of competitions or if they display qualities associated with hard work and effort.
The houses are;[edit]
Golden Tigers
Red Phoenix
Green Dragons
Purple Monkeys
Accreditation[edit]
Council of International Schools (CIS)
Cambridge International Certificate of Secondary Education (IGCSE)
International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme (IBDP)
The East Asia Regional Council of Schools (EARCOS)
Cambridge Assessment International Education
Association of China and Mongolia International Schools (ACAMIS)
Facilities[edit]
Primary Library
Secondary Library
Auditorium
Learning Communities
4 Apple Mac Labs
Music Room
Student Lounge Area
Multi-Purpose Room
School Cafeteria
Indoor and Outdoor Playgrounds
Gymnasium
Parent Meeting Room
Art Rooms
Dance Room
Presentation Rooms
IQ Filters Equipped Classrooms
HVAC IQ Air Filters in Larger Common Areas
Violin Room
One-on-One Music Tutoring Rooms
Science Labs
International school charity[edit]
In 2008 as a result of the Sichuan earthquake, Yew Chung International Schools started a charity called Seeds of Hope. Through a partnership with the China Youth Development Foundation, 'Hope Schools' are established in various parts of rural China. The funds for the charity are generated through charity driven projects and matched by local government organisations to build Seeds of Hope Schools.
Awards[edit]
In June 2012 Yew Chung International Schools received the “Cambridge Award for Excellence in Education”, the only international school in China to receive this award.[2]
Further reading[edit]
"Bringing the world into the classroom." China Daily Education. April 16, 2013.