Awash National Park is a national park in Ethiopia. Spanning across the southern tip of the Afar Region and the northeastern corner of the East Shewa Zone of Oromia, this park is 225 kilometers east of Addis Ababa (and a few kilometers west of Awash), with its southern boundary along the Awash River, and covers 850 square kilometers of acacia woodland and grassland. The Addis Ababa - Dire Dawa highway passes through this park, separating the Illala Saha Plains to the south from the Kudu Valley to the north. In the south of the park the Awash River gorge has amazing waterfalls. In the upper Kudu Valley at Filwoha are hot springs amid groves of palm trees.
The Awash National Park was established in 1966, although the act authorizing its existence was not completely passed for another three years. In establishing this park, as well as the Metehara Sugar Plantation to the south, the livelihoods of the indigenous Karayyu Oromo people have been endangered — an effect that is contrary to the Ethiopian government's original intention of these establishments serving to benefit the local population.
Contents
1 Fauna
2 Biomes
3 See also
4 References
5 External links
6 Line notes
Fauna[edit]
Wildlife in this park include hippopotamus, Nile crocodile, hyenas, lions, cheetahs, leopards, 335 East African oryxes, Soemmerring's gazelles, zebra, giraffe, Salt's dik-diks, lesser and greater kudus, and common warthogs. Olive baboons African wild dogs, hamadryas baboons are present, as well as over 453 species of native birds like the ostriches.[1] Animals like elephant, rhino and Cape buffalo existed here.

Biomes[edit]
Habitats in Awash National Park include acacia woodland, savanna and shrubland.
See also[edit]
Oromia Region
Philip Briggs. 2002. Ethiopia: The Bradt Travel Guide, 3rd edition (Chalfont St Peters: Bradt), pp. 335f
C. Michael Hogan. 2009. Painted Hunting Dog: Lycaon pictus, GlobalTwitcher.com, ed. N. Stromberg
External links[edit]
World Database on Protected Areas – Awash National Park
Former official site
Description of the National Park and its animals
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Awash National Park.
Line notes[edit]
^ C. Michael Hogan. 2009
hide
vte
National parks of Ethiopia
National parks
Abijatta-Shalla Alatash National Park Awash Bale Chebera Churchura Gambella Kafta Sheraro Mago Maze Nechisar Omo Semien Yangudi Rassa
Wildlife sanctuaries
Didessa Harar Kuni-Muktar Senkele Chelbi Yabelo

This article about a location in the Oromia Region of Ethiopia is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
This article about a location in the Afar Region of Ethiopia is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
This Africa protected areas related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.