The Mbéré Valley National Park is a national park in eastern-central Cameroon.[1]
Contents
1 Location
2 History
3 Flora and fauna
3.1 Flora
3.2 Fauna
4 Bibliography
5 References
Location[edit]
The park is located in the Mbéré department of the Adamawa Region. The western and northern borders form the river Koudini. From there, the River Bilao forms the northern border with the River Bassara. From the Bassara over the Mbéré to the Ngou, the park's eastern border runs. The most southerly point in the east is the waterfalls of Lanchrenon. The southern border runs from Bafouri via Borgou to the border of the Mbéré district. From there the western border runs back to the Koudini.[2]
History[edit]
The park was established on 4 February 2004 according to Decree N ° 2004/0352 / PM with the following aims:
Protection of the water reserves for the south of Cameroon and preservation of the picturesque landscapes of the Mbéré Valley.
Ensuring the continuity and flow of the river Mbéré.
Promote the development of ecotourism to improve the living conditions of the local population
Securing the habitat of species such as hippo, African buffalo and mountain reedbuck.[2]
Construction work in the park requires an official approval after environmental impact assessment. A development plan should regulate the rights of the local population. The plan defines a buffer zone of the park, as well as accompanying measures to promote socioeconomic activities for residents. The Ministry of Wild Animals also set up an administrative seat at the park. The Ministry of Environment and Forestry is responsible for further regulations on the principle of urgency.[2]
Flora and fauna[edit]
Flora[edit]
The area of the park can be described as a mixture of tree sway, wooded savannah and in the higher locations tree galleries. The vegetation is strongly influenced by the tree species Uapaca togoensis.[3]
Fauna[edit]
In addition to the highly endangered Western mountain reedbuck (Redunca fulvorufula adamauae), one finds the olive baboon (Papio anubis), the sitatunga, the Defassa waterbuck (Kobus ellipsiprymnus defassa) and the bushbuck (Tragelaphus scriptus). From time to time, kobs (Kobus kob) and roan antelopes (Hippotragus equinus) pass through the park.[3]
Bibliography[edit]
WWF, MINEF (2000), Deux missions de prospection de l'équipe WWF/PSSN dans l'Adamaoua Camerounais, pour une contribution à l'élaboration d'une stratégie de conservation de la biodiversité : Zones concernées : Tchabal Mbabo, Tchabal Ngandaba, Vallée du Mbéré (PDF; 1,6 MB) (PDF) (in German), retrieved 2011-07-28
^ World Database on Protected Areas – Mbéré Valley National Park
^
a b c CAMTEL. "Décret N°2004/0352/PM du 04 février 2004 portant création du parc national de la vallée du Mbéré. - Portail du Gouvernement du Cameroun". www.spm.gov.cm (in French). Archived from the original on 3 August 2017. Retrieved 2017-07-30.
^
a b WWF Report, S. 18 (in French)
hide
vte
Protected areas of Cameroon
National parks
Bakossi Bénoué Bouba Njida Boumba Bek Campo Ma'an Douala Edéa Faro Korup Lobéké Mbam Djerem Mbéré Valley Mefou Mount Cameroon Nki Takamanda Waza
Wildlife sanctuaries
Banyang-Mbo Wildlife Sanctuary Kagwene Gorilla Sanctuary Mengame Gorilla Sanctuary
Other protected areas
Bakossi Forest Reserve Dja Faunal Reserve Ebo Wildlife Reserve Lake Ossa Faunal Reserve Mbambe Forest Reserve Mekonge Integral Ecological Reserve Mont Nlonako Wildlife Reserve Rumpi Hills Wildlife Reserve