Meru National Park is a Kenyan national park located east of Meru, 350 km (220 mi) from Nairobi. Covering an area of 870 km2 (340 sq mi), it is one best known national parks in Kenya. Rainfall in this area is abundant with 635–762 mm (25.0–30.0 in) in the west of the park and 305–356 mm (12.0–14.0 in) in the east. The rainfall results in tall grass and lush swamps.
The park has a wide range of wild animals including the African bush elephant, lion, African leopard, cheetah, eastern black rhinoceros, southern white rhinoceros, Grévy's zebra, hippopotamus.
Meru was one of the two areas in which conservationists George Adamson and Joy Adamson raised Elsa the Lioness made famous in the best selling book and award-winning movie Born Free. Elsa the Lioness is buried in this park and part of Joy's ashes were scattered on her gravesite.
Contents
1 History
2 Attractions
3 References
4 External links
History[edit]
Between the years 2000 and 2005, the Kenya Wildlife Service, helped by the Agence Française de Développement (AFD) and International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW), restored Meru National Park from near ruin to one of the most promising tourist destinations in Eastern Africa, solving the parks poaching problem. IFAW donated $1.25 million to this major restoration project, and with this money aided in improving the basic infrastructure and provided essential equipment and vehicles for law enforcement activities.
Since 2005, the protected area is considered part of a Lion Conservation Unit.[2]
Attractions[edit]
Aside from the scenery and wildlife, tourist attractions include the once home of George and Joy Adamson, Adamson's Falls, the burial sites of Joy Adamson and Elsa the Lioness, views of Mount Kenya, and the Tana River.
^ World Database on Protected Areas – Meru National Park
^ IUCN Cat Specialist Group (2006). Conservation Strategy for the Lion Panthera leo in Eastern and Southern Africa. Pretoria, South Africa: IUCN.
External links[edit]
Kenya Wildlife Service – Meru National Park
Elsa Lioness Grave. FatherOfLions.org
Meru National Kenya, Safaris, Car Hire, Accommodation Lodges
Meru National Park Kenya
hide
vte
National Parks of Kenya
National Parks
Aberdare Amboseli Arabuko Sokoke Central Island Chyulu Hills Hell's Gate Kora Lake Nakuru Malka Mari Marsabit Meru Mount Elgon Mount Kenya Mount Longonot Nairobi Ol Donyo Sabuk Ruma Saiwa Swamp Sibiloi Tsavo East Tsavo West
Reserves
Arawale Bisanadi Boni Buffalo Springs Dodori Kerio Valley Kakamega Forest Kisumu Impala Lake Bogoria Maasai Mara Mwaluganje Mwea Samburu Shaba Shimba Hills Witu Forest
Marine National Parks
and Reserves
Kisite-Mpunguti Kiunga Malindi Mombasa Watamu
Sanctuary
Kisumu Impala
Former National Reserves
Tana River Primate National Reserve

This Eastern Province (Kenya) location article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.