The Etihad Museum (Arabic: متحف الاتحاد), historically called the Union House (Arabic: دار الاتحاد), is a museum in Dubai that collects, preserves, and displays the heritage of the United Arab Emirates in the areas of social, political, cultural, scientific, and military history. It holds everything from old passports to personal artifacts of the rulers of United Arab Emirates.[1] The historic signing of the Constitution of the United Arab Emirates, the raising of the first UAE flag, and the formation of the United Arab Emirates as a country on 2 December 1971 took place within the area that forms the museum today. The museum is designed as a document to signify the signing of the UAE constitution.
Contents
1 History
2 Building
3 See also
4 References
History[edit]
The museum encompasses the Union house, the location where the emirate's founding fathers signed a declaration that marked the formation of the UAE in 1971 – it is now part of the museum complex.[2]
Building[edit]
The museum was designed by Moriyama & Teshima Architects in the shape of a manuscript, with seven columns built into the museum to resemble the pens used to sign the original declaration. The building has eight permanent pavilions:[3]
Pavilion One: Shows a documentary film about the history of the UAE.
Pavilion Two: Houses a panoramic interactive map highlighting the era before the formation of the federation.
Pavilion Three: An interactive timeline that demonstrates key historical events before the union.
Al Maktoum|Sheikh Rashid bin Saeed Al Maktoum]].
Pavilion four: An interactive guide to the formation of the union.
Pavilion Six: A homage to the important moments and challenges confronted the founding fathers before 1971.
Pavilion Seven: This is dedicated to the UAE Constitution and includes the actual declaration itself.
Pavilion Eight: The final pavilion is an open gallery celebrating the newborn nation.
See also[edit]
List of museums in the United Arab Emirates
Culture of the United Arab Emirates