For the museum in Ireland, see Hunt Museum.
Hund Museum (Urdu: ھنڈ عجائب گھر) located in Hund, near the bank of the Indus River above Attock, Swabi district, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan.[1][2]
Contents
1 Excavation and Establishment
2 History
3 See also
4 References
5 External links
Excavation and Establishment[edit]
The project of Hund archaeological and tourist site was approved in 1994. Excavation in Hund start in June 1996. At the time of excavation beautiful houses, coins, jewellery and other household articles of the Indo-Greek and buildings of Kushana, Hindu Shahi and Islamic eras were found. The excavated houses, buildings and others showed the wonder engineering know how of the people of ancient times. Like had beautiful rooms and halls, rows of pillars, steps, floors levels and ovens. And the places where they lived had gorgeous gateways and planned streets. For the establishment of Hund Museum 33 kanals of land was acquired in 2002.
The Hund Museum was inaugurated by archaeologist late Dr. Ahmad Hasan Dani and then provincial culture secretary Arshad Sami Khan.[3]
History[edit]
Hund is the oldest city of the Swabi district located on the right bank of Indus River, having very rich history and passed through different eras with different peoples like Gandhara civilization after this passed by Hindu Shahi period the Muslim period and all the conquerors of this region passed by there like Alexander the Great in 327 BC also passed by this city and had spent a night in the village, before entering the Indian plains. Another famous Chinese Buddhist monk, scholar, traveller, translator and pilgrim Hiuen Tsang passed through this area in 644 AD. After Peshawar and Charsadda, it was the third capital of the Hindu Shahi period dynasty.[4]
Dr Abdur Rahman (ex-Chairman of the Department of Archaeology, University of Peshawar),[5] who has done his PhD thesis on Hund, according to him the Hund remained the third capital after Charsadda (then Pushkalavati) and Peshawar (erstwhile Purushapura) of the state spreading from Kabul to Punjab and Swat.[6][7]
See also[edit]
List of museums in Pakistan