Pakistan Air Force Museum Faisal (Urdu: پاک فضائیہ عجائب گھر) is an Air Force museum and park situated near Karsaz Flyover on Shahrah-e-Faisal in Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan.[1]
A majority of the aircraft, weapons and radar are displayed outside in the park but the main museum features all major fighter aircraft that have been used by the Pakistan Air Force. The museum also houses the Vickers VC.1 Viking aircraft used by Mohammed Ali Jinnah, founder of Pakistan, and a Folland Gnat of the Indian Air Force, that landed in Pasrur town, Pakistan in the Indo-Pakistani war of 1965. Also on display are the scale models of some World War I, World War II and some more modern aircraft and photo galleries of almost all the squadrons of Pakistan Air Force.[2]
Contents
1 History
2 Management
3 Gallery
4 Selected exhibits
5 See also
6 References
7 External links
History[edit]
The museum was established in 1990 in two unused hangars in a remote part of the Base. The museum was expanded significantly from its humble beginnings in the period 1999–2004. Additions include children playing areas, rides, and eateries.
Management[edit]
The museum is managed by a committee headed by the Air Officer Commanding Southern Air Command; however, it is managed and run by the deputy chairman. Recently the museum has been renamed as Historical Archives Section and given additional responsibilities for maintaining some documented history of the PAF. The current director / deputy chairman of the museum is Gp Capt Rizwan Idris. However, the museum was developed by Wing Commander Syed Salman Ahmed.
Gallery[edit]
Main Gate
Mirage III Aircraft
F-6 Aircraft
Archives Gallery
Museum Hall at night
Captured Indian Folland Gnat from 1965 war on display at the PAF Museum Gallery.
Shenyang F-6 Aircraft
Auster Aiglet retired from the PAF on display at the PAF Museum, Karachi.
Fighter plane At PAF Museum
Museum Hall Inside View
A model of the Martin B-57 bomber and the 30 mm cannon installed on the Shenyang F-6, on display at the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) Museum, Karachi.
Selected exhibits[edit]
Some of the aircraft that are preserved in the museum are:
Martin B-57 Canberra
De Havilland Tiger Moth
North American Harvard
Lockheed F-104 Starfighter
North American F-86 Sabre
Dassault Mirage 5
Shenyang F-6
Lockheed T-33
Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15
Auster Autocar
Antonov An-26
Antonov An-12
A-26 Invader
U-9 Aero Commander
Vickers Viking
Folland Gnat
Kaman HH-43 Huskie
Besides those from PAF inventory, visitors can see the captured Folland Gnat of Indian Air Force and Afghan Air Force Mig 21 and Iraq Air Force, Antonov An-12.
A statue of Indian Airforce's Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman along with the parts of the fuselage and tail of his Mig-21 aircraft are also on display in a gallery named Operation Swift Retort.[3]
See also[edit]
List of museums in Pakistan