Sindhology (Sindhi: سنڌولوجي) is a field of study and academic research that covers the history, society, culture, and literature of Sindh, a province of Pakistan. The subject was first brought into the academic circles with the establishment of the Institute of Sindhology at Sindh University in 1964. Since then, it has developed into a discipline that covers the aspects of history and archaeology from the Indus Valley Civilization to the modern Sindhi society. The subject has also received wider attention at international levels.[1] An academic or expert who specialises in Sindhology is called a Sindhologist.
Contents
1 History
2 Organisations
3 Prominent Sindhologists
4 See also
5 Notes
6 References
7 External links
History[edit]
The term Sindhology to denote a subject of knowledge about Sindh was first coined in 1964 with the establishment of the Institute of Sindhology.[2] The objective at the time was to promote the study and broader research on Sindh, and develop a repository of archives, books, manuscripts, and research papers. Another wider objective was to promote the knowledge about Sindh in various other national and regional languages of Pakistan,[3] as well as international languages such as Arabic, English, Persian and Urdu.[4]
The subject was actually developed on the patterns of Egyptology and Indology.[5] The study area encompassed the multidisciplinary research about the land that has been shaped by the 5000 years old Indus Valley Civilization as well as the Indus river (locally known as Sindhu Darya). This enables the scope of the study to cover the antiquities, relics, culture, traditions, and literature with unique forms of music, art, and poetry that has prevailed in both the ancient and modern Sindh.[6]
Organisations[edit]
Institute of Sindhology, Pakistan
Indian Institute of Sindhology
American Institute of Sindhology
Prominent Sindhologists[edit]
The first major attempt to bring together the leading Sindhologists was an international seminar 'Sindh Through the Centuries' held in Karachi in Spring 1975 under the auspices of the Government of Sindh.[7] Some of the prominent names in Sindhology include:
Ali S. Asani
Dr. Nabi Bux Khan Baloch
Hassam-ud-Din Rashidi
Ahmad Hasan Dani
Annemarie Schimmel
Allama I. I. Kazi
Asko Parpola
Dr. Ghulam Ali Allana
Jean-François Jarrige
N. G. Majumdar
K. R. Malkani
Muhammad Usman Diplai
Ghulam Rabbani Agro
Muhammad Qasim Maka
See also[edit]
Institute of Sindhology
Encyclopedia Sindhiana
University of Sindh
Sindhi literature
Sindhi Adabi Board
Jamshoro
List of museums in Pakistan
Notes[edit]